<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      IX
    </h2>
    <p>
      A FEW days later, the Gadfly, still rather pale and limping more than
      usual, entered the reading room of the public library and asked for
      Cardinal Montanelli&rsquo;s sermons. Riccardo, who was reading at a table near
      him, looked up. He liked the Gadfly very much, but could not digest this
      one trait in him&mdash;this curious personal maliciousness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you preparing another volley against that unlucky Cardinal?&rdquo; he asked
      half irritably.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear fellow, why do you a-a-always attribute evil m-m-motives to
      people? It&rsquo;s m-most unchristian. I am preparing an essay on contemporary
      theology for the n-n-new paper.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What new paper?&rdquo; Riccardo frowned. It was perhaps an open secret that a
      new press-law was expected and that the Opposition was preparing to
      astonish the town with a radical newspaper; but still it was, formally, a
      secret.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Swindlers&rsquo; Gazette, of course, or the Church Calendar.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sh-sh! Rivarez, we are disturbing the other readers.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well then, stick to your surgery, if that&rsquo;s your subject, and l-l-leave
      me to th-theology&mdash;that&rsquo;s mine. I d-d-don&rsquo;t interfere with your
      treatment of broken bones, though I know a p-p-precious lot more about
      them than you do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He sat down to his volume of sermons with an intent and preoccupied face.
      One of the librarians came up to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signor Rivarez! I think you were in the Duprez expedition, exploring the
      tributaries of the Amazon? Perhaps you will kindly help us in a
      difficulty. A lady has been inquiring for the records of the expedition,
      and they are at the binder&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does she want to know?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Only in what year the expedition started and when it passed through
      Ecuador.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It started from Paris in the autumn of 1837, and passed through Quito in
      April, 1838. We were three years in Brazil; then went down to Rio and got
      back to Paris in the summer of 1841. Does the lady want the dates of the
      separate discoveries?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, thank you; only these. I have written them down. Beppo, take this
      paper to Signora Bolla, please. Many thanks, Signor Rivarez. I am sorry to
      have troubled you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly leaned back in his chair with a perplexed frown. What did she
      want the dates for? When they passed through Ecuador&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      Gemma went home with the slip of paper in her hand. April, 1838&mdash;and
      Arthur had died in May, 1833. Five years&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      She began pacing up and down her room. She had slept badly the last few
      nights, and there were dark shadows under her eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Five years;&mdash;and an &ldquo;overluxurious home&rdquo;&mdash;and &ldquo;someone he had
      trusted had deceived him&rdquo;&mdash;had deceived him&mdash;and he had found it
      out&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      She stopped and put up both hands to her head. Oh, this was utterly mad&mdash;it
      was not possible&mdash;it was absurd&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet, how they had dragged that harbour!
    </p>
    <p>
      Five years&mdash;and he was &ldquo;not twenty-one&rdquo; when the Lascar&mdash;&mdash;
      Then he must have been nineteen when he ran away from home. Had he not
      said: &ldquo;A year and a half&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; Where did he get those blue eyes
      from, and that nervous restlessness of the fingers? And why was he so
      bitter against Montanelli? Five years&mdash;five years&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      If she could but know that he was drowned&mdash;if she could but have seen
      the body; some day, surely, the old wound would have left off aching, the
      old memory would have lost its terrors. Perhaps in another twenty years
      she would have learned to look back without shrinking.
    </p>
    <p>
      All her youth had been poisoned by the thought of what she had done.
      Resolutely, day after day and year after year, she had fought against the
      demon of remorse. Always she had remembered that her work lay in the
      future; always had shut her eyes and ears to the haunting spectre of the
      past. And day after day, year after year, the image of the drowned body
      drifting out to sea had never left her, and the bitter cry that she could
      not silence had risen in her heart: &ldquo;I have killed Arthur! Arthur is
      dead!&rdquo; Sometimes it had seemed to her that her burden was too heavy to be
      borne.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now she would have given half her life to have that burden back again. If
      she had killed him&mdash;that was a familiar grief; she had endured it too
      long to sink under it now. But if she had driven him, not into the water
      but into&mdash;&mdash;&mdash; She sat down, covering her eyes with both
      hands. And her life had been darkened for his sake, because he was dead!
      If she had brought upon him nothing worse than death&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      Steadily, pitilessly she went back, step by step, through the hell of his
      past life. It was as vivid to her as though she had seen and felt it all;
      the helpless shivering of the naked soul, the mockery that was bitterer
      than death, the horror of loneliness, the slow, grinding, relentless
      agony. It was as vivid as if she had sat beside him in the filthy Indian
      hut; as if she had suffered with him in the silver-mines, the coffee
      fields, the horrible variety show&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      The variety show&mdash;&mdash; No, she must shut out that image, at least;
      it was enough to drive one mad to sit and think of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She opened a little drawer in her writing-desk. It contained the few
      personal relics which she could not bring herself to destroy. She was not
      given to the hoarding up of sentimental trifles; and the preservation of
      these keepsakes was a concession to that weaker side of her nature which
      she kept under with so steady a hand. She very seldom allowed herself to
      look at them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now she took them out, one after another: Giovanni&rsquo;s first letter to her,
      and the flowers that had lain in his dead hand; a lock of her baby&rsquo;s hair
      and a withered leaf from her father&rsquo;s grave. At the back of the drawer was
      a miniature portrait of Arthur at ten years old&mdash;the only existing
      likeness of him.
    </p>
    <p>
      She sat down with it in her hands and looked at the beautiful childish
      head, till the face of the real Arthur rose up afresh before her. How
      clear it was in every detail! The sensitive lines of the mouth, the wide,
      earnest eyes, the seraphic purity of expression&mdash;they were graven in
      upon her memory, as though he had died yesterday. Slowly the blinding
      tears welled up and hid the portrait.
    </p>
    <p>
      Oh, how could she have thought such a thing! It was like sacrilege even to
      dream of this bright, far-off spirit, bound to the sordid miseries of
      life. Surely the gods had loved him a little, and had let him die young!
      Better a thousand times that he should pass into utter nothingness than
      that he should live and be the Gadfly&mdash;the Gadfly, with his faultless
      neckties and his doubtful witticisms, his bitter tongue and his ballet
      girl! No, no! It was all a horrible, senseless fancy; and she had vexed
      her heart with vain imaginings. Arthur was dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;May I come in?&rdquo; asked a soft voice at the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      She started so that the portrait fell from her hand, and the Gadfly,
      limping across the room, picked it up and handed it to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How you startled me!&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am s-so sorry. Perhaps I am disturbing you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. I was only turning over some old things.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She hesitated for a moment; then handed him back the miniature.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you think of that head?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      While he looked at it she watched his face as though her life depended
      upon its expression; but it was merely negative and critical.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have set me a difficult task,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The portrait is faded, and a
      child&rsquo;s face is always hard to read. But I should think that child would
      grow into an unlucky man, and the wisest thing he could do would be to
      abstain from growing into a man at all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look at the line of the under-lip. Th-th-that is the sort of nature that
      feels pain as pain and wrong as wrong; and the world has no r-r-room for
      such people; it needs people who feel nothing but their work.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it at all like anyone you know?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked at the portrait more closely.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. What a curious thing! Of course it is; very like.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Like whom?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;C-c-cardinal Montan-nelli. I wonder whether his irreproachable Eminence
      has any nephews, by the way? Who is it, if I may ask?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is a portrait, taken in childhood, of the friend I told you about the
      other day&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whom you killed?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She winced in spite of herself. How lightly, how cruelly he used that
      dreadful word!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, whom I killed&mdash;if he is really dead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She kept her eyes on his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have sometimes doubted,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;The body was never found. He may
      have run away from home, like you, and gone to South America.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let us hope not. That would be a bad memory to carry about with you. I
      have d-d-done some hard fighting in my t-time, and have sent m-more than
      one man to Hades, perhaps; but if I had it on my conscience that I had
      sent any l-living thing to South America, I should sleep badly&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then do you believe,&rdquo; she interrupted, coming nearer to him with clasped
      hands, &ldquo;that if he were not drowned,&mdash;if he had been through your
      experience instead,&mdash;he would never come back and let the past go? Do
      you believe he would NEVER forget? Remember, it has cost me something,
      too. Look!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She pushed back the heavy waves of hair from her forehead. Through the
      black locks ran a broad white streak.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a long silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think,&rdquo; the Gadfly said slowly, &ldquo;that the dead are better dead.
      Forgetting some things is a difficult matter. And if I were in the place
      of your dead friend, I would s-s-stay dead. The REVENANT is an ugly
      spectre.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She put the portrait back into its drawer and locked the desk.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is hard doctrine,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And now we will talk about something
      else.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I came to have a little business talk with you, if I may&mdash;a private
      one, about a plan that I have in my head.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She drew a chair to the table and sat down. &ldquo;What do you think of the
      projected press-law?&rdquo; he began, without a trace of his usual stammer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I think of it? I think it will not be of much value, but half a loaf
      is better than no bread.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Undoubtedly. Then do you intend to work on one of the new papers these
      good folk here are preparing to start?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought of doing so. There is always a great deal of practical work to
      be done in starting any paper&mdash;printing and circulation arrangements
      and&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How long are you going to waste your mental gifts in that fashion?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why &lsquo;waste&rsquo;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because it is waste. You know quite well that you have a far better head
      than most of the men you are working with, and you let them make a regular
      drudge and Johannes factotum of you. Intellectually you are as far ahead
      of Grassini and Galli as if they were schoolboys; yet you sit correcting
      their proofs like a printer&rsquo;s devil.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the first place, I don&rsquo;t spend all my time in correcting proofs; and
      moreover it seems to me that you exaggerate my mental capacities. They are
      by no means so brilliant as you think.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think them brilliant at all,&rdquo; he answered quietly; &ldquo;but I do
      think them sound and solid, which is of much more importance. At those
      dreary committee meetings it is always you who put your finger on the weak
      spot in everybody&rsquo;s logic.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are not fair to the others. Martini, for instance, has a very logical
      head, and there is no doubt about the capacities of Fabrizi and Lega. Then
      Grassini has a sounder knowledge of Italian economic statistics than any
      official in the country, perhaps.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, that&rsquo;s not saying much; but let us lay them and their capacities
      aside. The fact remains that you, with such gifts as you possess, might do
      more important work and fill a more responsible post than at present.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am quite satisfied with my position. The work I am doing is not of very
      much value, perhaps, but we all do what we can.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signora Bolla, you and I have gone too far to play at compliments and
      modest denials now. Tell me honestly, do you recognize that you are using
      up your brain on work which persons inferior to you could do as well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Since you press me for an answer&mdash;yes, to some extent.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then why do you let that go on?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do you let it go on?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because&mdash;I can&rsquo;t help it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked up reproachfully. &ldquo;That is unkind&mdash;it&rsquo;s not fair to press
      me so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But all the same you are going to tell me why.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you must have it, then&mdash;because my life has been smashed into
      pieces, and I have not the energy to start anything REAL, now. I am about
      fit to be a revolutionary cab-horse, and do the party&rsquo;s drudge-work. At
      least I do it conscientiously, and it must be done by somebody.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly it must be done by somebody; but not always by the same
      person.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s about all I&rsquo;m fit for.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked at her with half-shut eyes, inscrutably. Presently she raised
      her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are returning to the old subject; and this was to be a business talk.
      It is quite useless, I assure you, to tell me I might have done all sorts
      of things. I shall never do them now. But I may be able to help you in
      thinking out your plan. What is it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You begin by telling me that it is useless for me to suggest anything,
      and then ask what I want to suggest. My plan requires your help in action,
      not only in thinking out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me hear it and then we will discuss.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me first whether you have heard anything about schemes for a rising
      in Venetia.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have heard of nothing but schemes for risings and Sanfedist plots ever
      since the amnesty, and I fear I am as sceptical about the one as about the
      other.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So am I, in most cases; but I am speaking of really serious preparations
      for a rising of the whole province against the Austrians. A good many
      young fellows in the Papal States&mdash;particularly in the Four Legations&mdash;are
      secretly preparing to get across there and join as volunteers. And I hear
      from my friends in the Romagna&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me,&rdquo; she interrupted, &ldquo;are you quite sure that these friends of
      yours can be trusted?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite sure. I know them personally, and have worked with them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is, they are members of the &lsquo;sect&rsquo; to which you belong? Forgive my
      scepticism, but I am always a little doubtful as to the accuracy of
      information received from secret societies. It seems to me that the habit&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who told you I belonged to a &lsquo;sect&rsquo;?&rdquo; he interrupted sharply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No one; I guessed it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; He leaned back in his chair and looked at her, frowning. &ldquo;Do you
      always guess people&rsquo;s private affairs?&rdquo; he said after a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very often. I am rather observant, and have a habit of putting things
      together. I tell you that so that you may be careful when you don&rsquo;t want
      me to know a thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t mind your knowing anything so long as it goes no further. I
      suppose this has not&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She lifted her head with a gesture of half-offended surprise. &ldquo;Surely that
      is an unnecessary question!&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I know you would not speak of anything to outsiders; but I
      thought that perhaps, to the members of your party&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The party&rsquo;s business is with facts, not with my personal conjectures and
      fancies. Of course I have never mentioned the subject to anyone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you. Do you happen to have guessed which sect I belong to?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope&mdash;you must not take offence at my frankness; it was you who
      started this talk, you know&mdash;&mdash; I do hope it is not the
      &lsquo;Knifers.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do you hope that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because you are fit for better things.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are all fit for better things than we ever do. There is your own
      answer back again. However, it is not the &lsquo;Knifers&rsquo; that I belong to, but
      the &lsquo;Red Girdles.&rsquo; They are a steadier lot, and take their work more
      seriously.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you mean the work of knifing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That, among other things. Knives are very useful in their way; but only
      when you have a good, organized propaganda behind them. That is what I
      dislike in the other sect. They think a knife can settle all the world&rsquo;s
      difficulties; and that&rsquo;s a mistake. It can settle a good many, but not
      all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you honestly believe that it settles any?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked at her in surprise.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course,&rdquo; she went on, &ldquo;it eliminates, for the moment, the practical
      difficulty caused by the presence of a clever spy or objectionable
      official; but whether it does not create worse difficulties in place of
      the one removed is another question. It seems to me like the parable of
      the swept and garnished house and the seven devils. Every assassination
      only makes the police more vicious and the people more accustomed to
      violence and brutality, and the last state of the community may be worse
      than the first.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you think will happen when the revolution comes? Do you suppose
      the people won&rsquo;t have to get accustomed to violence then? War is war.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but open revolution is another matter. It is one moment in the
      people&rsquo;s life, and it is the price we have to pay for all our progress. No
      doubt fearful things will happen; they must in every revolution. But they
      will be isolated facts&mdash;exceptional features of an exceptional
      moment. The horrible thing about this promiscuous knifing is that it
      becomes a habit. The people get to look upon it as an every-day
      occurrence, and their sense of the sacredness of human life gets blunted.
      I have not been much in the Romagna, but what little I have seen of the
      people has given me the impression that they have got, or are getting,
      into a mechanical habit of violence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely even that is better than a mechanical habit of obedience and
      submission.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think so. All mechanical habits are bad and slavish, and this one
      is ferocious as well. Of course, if you look upon the work of the
      revolutionist as the mere wresting of certain definite concessions from
      the government, then the secret sect and the knife must seem to you the
      best weapons, for there is nothing else which all governments so dread.
      But if you think, as I do, that to force the government&rsquo;s hand is not an
      end in itself, but only a means to an end, and that what we really need to
      reform is the relation between man and man, then you must go differently
      to work. Accustoming ignorant people to the sight of blood is not the way
      to raise the value they put on human life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the value they put on religion?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He smiled.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think we differ as to where the root of the mischief lies. You place it
      in a lack of appreciation of the value of human life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rather of the sacredness of human personality.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Put it as you like. To me the great cause of our muddles and mistakes
      seems to lie in the mental disease called religion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you mean any religion in particular?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no! That is a mere question of external symptoms. The disease itself
      is what is called a religious attitude of mind. It is the morbid desire to
      set up a fetich and adore it, to fall down and worship something. It makes
      little difference whether the something be Jesus or Buddha or a tum-tum
      tree. You don&rsquo;t agree with me, of course. You may be atheist or agnostic
      or anything you like, but I could feel the religious temperament in you at
      five yards. However, it is of no use for us to discuss that. But you are
      quite mistaken in thinking that I, for one, look upon the knifing as
      merely a means of removing objectionable officials&mdash;it is, above all,
      a means, and I think the best means, of undermining the prestige of the
      Church and of accustoming people to look upon clerical agents as upon any
      other vermin.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And when you have accomplished that; when you have roused the wild beast
      that sleeps in the people and set it on the Church; then&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I shall have done the work that makes it worth my while to live.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is THAT the work you spoke of the other day?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, just that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She shivered and turned away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are disappointed in me?&rdquo; he said, looking up with a smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; not exactly that. I am&mdash;I think&mdash;a little afraid of you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She turned round after a moment and said in her ordinary business voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is an unprofitable discussion. Our standpoints are too different.
      For my part, I believe in propaganda, propaganda, and propaganda; and when
      you can get it, open insurrection.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then let us come back to the question of my plan; it has something to do
      with propaganda and more with insurrection.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As I tell you, a good many volunteers are going from the Romagna to join
      the Venetians. We do not know yet how soon the insurrection will break
      out. It may not be till the autumn or winter; but the volunteers in the
      Apennines must be armed and ready, so that they may be able to start for
      the plains directly they are sent for. I have undertaken to smuggle the
      firearms and ammunition on to Papal territory for them&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait a minute. How do you come to be working with that set? The
      revolutionists in Lombardy and Venetia are all in favour of the new Pope.
      They are going in for liberal reforms, hand in hand with the progressive
      movement in the Church. How can a &lsquo;no-compromise&rsquo; anti-clerical like you
      get on with them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He shrugged his shoulders. &ldquo;What is it to me if they like to amuse
      themselves with a rag-doll, so long as they do their work? Of course they
      will take the Pope for a figurehead. What have I to do with that, if only
      the insurrection gets under way somehow? Any stick will do to beat a dog
      with, I suppose, and any cry to set the people on the Austrians.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it you want me to do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Chiefly to help me get the firearms across.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But how could I do that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are just the person who could do it best. I think of buying the arms
      in England, and there is a good deal of difficulty about bringing them
      over. It&rsquo;s impossible to get them through any of the Pontifical sea-ports;
      they must come by Tuscany, and go across the Apennines.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That makes two frontiers to cross instead of one.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; but the other way is hopeless; you can&rsquo;t smuggle a big transport in
      at a harbour where there is no trade, and you know the whole shipping of
      Civita Vecchia amounts to about three row-boats and a fishing smack. If we
      once get the things across Tuscany, I can manage the Papal frontier; my
      men know every path in the mountains, and we have plenty of hiding-places.
      The transport must come by sea to Leghorn, and that is my great
      difficulty; I am not in with the smugglers there, and I believe you are.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Give me five minutes to think.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She leaned forward, resting one elbow on her knee, and supporting the chin
      on the raised hand. After a few moments&rsquo; silence she looked up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is possible that I might be of some use in that part of the work,&rdquo; she
      said; &ldquo;but before we go any further, I want to ask you a question. Can you
      give me your word that this business is not connected with any stabbing or
      secret violence of any kind?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly. It goes without saying that I should not have asked you to
      join in a thing of which I know you disapprove.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When do you want a definite answer from me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is not much time to lose; but I can give you a few days to decide
      in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you free next Saturday evening?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me see&mdash;to-day is Thursday; yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then come here. I will think the matter over and give you a final
      answer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      On the following Sunday Gemma sent in to the committee of the Florentine
      branch of the Mazzinian party a statement that she wished to undertake a
      special work of a political nature, which would for a few months prevent
      her from performing the functions for which she had up till now been
      responsible to the party.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some surprise was felt at this announcement, but the committee raised no
      objection; she had been known in the party for several years as a person
      whose judgment might be trusted; and the members agreed that if Signora
      Bolla took an unexpected step, she probably had good reasons for it.
    </p>
    <p>
      To Martini she said frankly that she had undertaken to help the Gadfly
      with some &ldquo;frontier work.&rdquo; She had stipulated for the right to tell her
      old friend this much, in order that there might be no misunderstanding or
      painful sense of doubt and mystery between them. It seemed to her that she
      owed him this proof of confidence. He made no comment when she told him;
      but she saw, without knowing why, that the news had wounded him deeply.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were sitting on the terrace of her lodging, looking out over the red
      roofs to Fiesole. After a long silence, Martini rose and began tramping up
      and down with his hands in his pockets, whistling to himself&mdash;a sure
      sign with him of mental agitation. She sat looking at him for a little
      while.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cesare, you are worried about this affair,&rdquo; she said at last. &ldquo;I am very
      sorry you feel so despondent over it; but I could decide only as seemed
      right to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is not the affair,&rdquo; he answered, sullenly; &ldquo;I know nothing about it,
      and it probably is all right, once you have consented to go into it. It&rsquo;s
      the MAN I distrust.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think you misunderstand him; I did till I got to know him better. He is
      far from perfect, but there is much more good in him than you think.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very likely.&rdquo; For a moment he tramped to and fro in silence, then
      suddenly stopped beside her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gemma, give it up! Give it up before it is too late! Don&rsquo;t let that man
      drag you into things you will repent afterwards.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cesare,&rdquo; she said gently, &ldquo;you are not thinking what you are saying. No
      one is dragging me into anything. I have made this decision of my own
      will, after thinking the matter well over alone. You have a personal
      dislike to Rivarez, I know; but we are talking of politics now, not of
      persons.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Madonna! Give it up! That man is dangerous; he is secret, and cruel, and
      unscrupulous&mdash;and he is in love with you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She drew back.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cesare, how can you get such fancies into your head?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is in love with you,&rdquo; Martini repeated. &ldquo;Keep clear of him, Madonna!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear Cesare, I can&rsquo;t keep clear of him; and I can&rsquo;t explain to you why.
      We are tied together&mdash;not by any wish or doing of our own.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you are tied, there is nothing more to say,&rdquo; Martini answered wearily.
    </p>
    <p>
      He went away, saying that he was busy, and tramped for hours up and down
      the muddy streets. The world looked very black to him that evening. One
      poor ewe-lamb&mdash;and this slippery creature had stepped in and stolen
      it away.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0017" id="link2HCH0017">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
