<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      III
    </h2>
    <p>
      THE Gadfly took lodgings outside the Roman gate, near to which Zita was
      boarding. He was evidently somewhat of a sybarite; and, though nothing in
      the rooms showed any serious extravagance, there was a tendency to
      luxuriousness in trifles and to a certain fastidious daintiness in the
      arrangement of everything which surprised Galli and Riccardo. They had
      expected to find a man who had lived among the wildernesses of the Amazon
      more simple in his tastes, and wondered at his spotless ties and rows of
      boots, and at the masses of flowers which always stood upon his writing
      table. On the whole they got on very well with him. He was hospitable and
      friendly to everyone, especially to the local members of the Mazzinian
      party. To this rule Gemma, apparently, formed an exception; he seemed to
      have taken a dislike to her from the time of their first meeting, and in
      every way avoided her company. On two or three occasions he was actually
      rude to her, thus bringing upon himself Martini&rsquo;s most cordial
      detestation. There had been no love lost between the two men from the
      beginning; their temperaments appeared to be too incompatible for them to
      feel anything but repugnance for each other. On Martini&rsquo;s part this was
      fast developing into hostility.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care about his not liking me,&rdquo; he said one day to Gemma with an
      aggrieved air. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t like him, for that matter; so there&rsquo;s no harm
      done. But I can&rsquo;t stand the way he behaves to you. If it weren&rsquo;t for the
      scandal it would make in the party first to beg a man to come and then to
      quarrel with him, I should call him to account for it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let him alone, Cesare; it isn&rsquo;t of any consequence, and after all, it&rsquo;s
      as much my fault as his.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is your fault?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That he dislikes me so. I said a brutal thing to him when we first met,
      that night at the Grassinis&rsquo;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;YOU said a brutal thing? That&rsquo;s hard to believe, Madonna.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was unintentional, of course, and I was very sorry. I said something
      about people laughing at cripples, and he took it personally. It had never
      occurred to me to think of him as a cripple; he is not so badly deformed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course not. He has one shoulder higher than the other, and his left
      arm is pretty badly disabled, but he&rsquo;s neither hunchbacked nor clubfooted.
      As for his lameness, it isn&rsquo;t worth talking about.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anyway, he shivered all over and changed colour. Of course it was
      horribly tactless of me, but it&rsquo;s odd he should be so sensitive. I wonder
      if he has ever suffered from any cruel jokes of that kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Much more likely to have perpetrated them, I should think. There&rsquo;s a sort
      of internal brutality about that man, under all his fine manners, that is
      perfectly sickening to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, Cesare, that&rsquo;s downright unfair. I don&rsquo;t like him any more than you
      do, but what is the use of making him out worse than he is? His manner is
      a little affected and irritating&mdash;I expect he has been too much
      lionized&mdash;and the everlasting smart speeches are dreadfully tiring;
      but I don&rsquo;t believe he means any harm.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what he means, but there&rsquo;s something not clean about a man
      who sneers at everything. It fairly disgusted me the other day at
      Fabrizi&rsquo;s debate to hear the way he cried down the reforms in Rome, just
      as if he wanted to find a foul motive for everything.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gemma sighed. &ldquo;I am afraid I agreed better with him than with you on that
      point,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;All you good people are so full of the most delightful
      hopes and expectations; you are always ready to think that if one
      well-meaning middle-aged gentleman happens to get elected Pope, everything
      else will come right of itself. He has only got to throw open the prison
      doors and give his blessing to everybody all round, and we may expect the
      millennium within three months. You never seem able to see that he can&rsquo;t
      set things right even if he would. It&rsquo;s the principle of the thing that&rsquo;s
      wrong, not the behaviour of this man or that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What principle? The temporal power of the Pope?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why that in particular? That&rsquo;s merely a part of the general wrong. The
      bad principle is that any man should hold over another the power to bind
      and loose. It&rsquo;s a false relationship to stand in towards one&rsquo;s fellows.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Martini held up his hands. &ldquo;That will do, Madonna,&rdquo; he said, laughing. &ldquo;I
      am not going to discuss with you, once you begin talking rank
      Antinomianism in that fashion. I&rsquo;m sure your ancestors must have been
      English Levellers in the seventeenth century. Besides, what I came round
      about is this MS.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He pulled it out of his pocket.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Another new pamphlet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A stupid thing this wretched man Rivarez sent in to yesterday&rsquo;s
      committee. I knew we should come to loggerheads with him before long.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is the matter with it? Honestly, Cesare, I think you are a little
      prejudiced. Rivarez may be unpleasant, but he&rsquo;s not stupid.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I don&rsquo;t deny that this is clever enough in its way; but you had
      better read the thing yourself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The pamphlet was a skit on the wild enthusiasm over the new Pope with
      which Italy was still ringing. Like all the Gadfly&rsquo;s writing, it was
      bitter and vindictive; but, notwithstanding her irritation at the style,
      Gemma could not help recognizing in her heart the justice of the
      criticism.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I quite agree with you that it is detestably malicious,&rdquo; she said, laying
      down the manuscript. &ldquo;But the worst thing about it is that it&rsquo;s all true.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gemma!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but it is. The man&rsquo;s a cold-blooded eel, if you like; but he&rsquo;s got
      the truth on his side. There is no use in our trying to persuade ourselves
      that this doesn&rsquo;t hit the mark&mdash;it does!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then do you suggest that we should print it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah! that&rsquo;s quite another matter. I certainly don&rsquo;t think we ought to
      print it as it stands; it would hurt and alienate everybody and do no
      good. But if he would rewrite it and cut out the personal attacks, I think
      it might be made into a really valuable piece of work. As political
      criticism it is very fine. I had no idea he could write so well. He says
      things which need saying and which none of us have had the courage to say.
      This passage, where he compares Italy to a tipsy man weeping with
      tenderness on the neck of the thief who is picking his pocket, is
      splendidly written.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gemma! The very worst bit in the whole thing! I hate that ill-natured
      yelping at everything and everybody!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So do I; but that&rsquo;s not the point. Rivarez has a very disagreeable style,
      and as a human being he is not attractive; but when he says that we have
      made ourselves drunk with processions and embracing and shouting about
      love and reconciliation, and that the Jesuits and Sanfedists are the
      people who will profit by it all, he&rsquo;s right a thousand times. I wish I
      could have been at the committee yesterday. What decision did you finally
      arrive at?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I have come here about: to ask you to go and talk it over with him
      and persuade him to soften the thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Me? But I hardly know the man; and besides that, he detests me. Why
      should I go, of all people?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Simply because there&rsquo;s no one else to do it to-day. Besides, you are more
      reasonable than the rest of us, and won&rsquo;t get into useless arguments and
      quarrel with him, as we should.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shan&rsquo;t do that, certainly. Well, I will go if you like, though I have
      not much hope of success.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sure you will be able to manage him if you try. Yes, and tell him
      that the committee all admired the thing from a literary point of view.
      That will put him into a good humour, and it&rsquo;s perfectly true, too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      The Gadfly was sitting beside a table covered with flowers and ferns,
      staring absently at the floor, with an open letter on his knee. A shaggy
      collie dog, lying on a rug at his feet, raised its head and growled as
      Gemma knocked at the open door, and the Gadfly rose hastily and bowed in a
      stiff, ceremonious way. His face had suddenly grown hard and
      expressionless.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are too kind,&rdquo; he said in his most chilling manner. &ldquo;If you had let
      me know that you wanted to speak to me I would have called on you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Seeing that he evidently wished her at the end of the earth, Gemma
      hastened to state her business. He bowed again and placed a chair for her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The committee wished me to call upon you,&rdquo; she began, &ldquo;because there has
      been a certain difference of opinion about your pamphlet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I expected.&rdquo; He smiled and sat down opposite to her, drawing a large
      vase of chrysanthemums between his face and the light.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Most of the members agreed that, however much they may admire the
      pamphlet as a literary composition, they do not think that in its present
      form it is quite suitable for publication. They fear that the vehemence of
      its tone may give offence, and alienate persons whose help and support are
      valuable to the party.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He pulled a chrysanthemum from the vase and began slowly plucking off one
      white petal after another. As her eyes happened to catch the movement of
      the slim right hand dropping the petals, one by one, an uncomfortable
      sensation came over Gemma, as though she had somewhere seen that gesture
      before.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As a literary composition,&rdquo; he remarked in his soft, cold voice, &ldquo;it is
      utterly worthless, and could be admired only by persons who know nothing
      about literature. As for its giving offence, that is the very thing I
      intended it to do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That I quite understand. The question is whether you may not succeed in
      giving offence to the wrong people.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He shrugged his shoulders and put a torn-off petal between his teeth. &ldquo;I
      think you are mistaken,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The question is: For what purpose did
      your committee invite me to come here? I understood, to expose and
      ridicule the Jesuits. I fulfil my obligation to the best of my ability.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I can assure you that no one has any doubt as to either the ability
      or the good-will. What the committee fears is that the liberal party may
      take offence, and also that the town workmen may withdraw their moral
      support. You may have meant the pamphlet for an attack upon the
      Sanfedists: but many readers will construe it as an attack upon the Church
      and the new Pope; and this, as a matter of political tactics, the
      committee does not consider desirable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I begin to understand. So long as I keep to the particular set of
      clerical gentlemen with whom the party is just now on bad terms, I may
      speak sooth if the fancy takes me; but directly I touch upon the
      committee&rsquo;s own pet priests&mdash;&lsquo;truth&rsquo;s a dog must to kennel; he must
      be whipped out, when the&mdash;Holy Father may stand by the fire and&mdash;&mdash;-&rsquo;
      Yes, the fool was right; I&rsquo;d rather be any kind of a thing than a fool. Of
      course I must bow to the committee&rsquo;s decision, but I continue to think
      that it has pared its wit o&rsquo; both sides and left&mdash;M-mon-signor
      M-m-montan-n-nelli in the middle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Montanelli?&rdquo; Gemma repeated. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand you. Do you mean the
      Bishop of Brisighella?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; the new Pope has just created him a Cardinal, you know. I have a
      letter about him here. Would you care to hear it? The writer is a friend
      of mine on the other side of the frontier.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Papal frontier?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. This is what he writes&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; He took up the letter which
      had been in his hand when she entered, and read aloud, suddenly beginning
      to stammer violently:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Y-o-you will s-s-s-soon have the p-pleasure of m-m-meeting one of our
      w-w-worst enemies, C-cardinal Lorenzo M-montan-n-nelli, the B-b-bishop of
      Brisig-g-hella. He int-t&mdash;&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He broke off, paused a moment, and began again, very slowly and drawling
      insufferably, but no longer stammering:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;He intends to visit Tuscany during the coming month on a mission of
      reconciliation. He will preach first in Florence, where he will stay for
      about three weeks; then will go on to Siena and Pisa, and return to the
      Romagna by Pistoja. He ostensibly belongs to the liberal party in the
      Church, and is a personal friend of the Pope and Cardinal Feretti. Under
      Gregory he was out of favour, and was kept out of sight in a little hole
      in the Apennines. Now he has come suddenly to the front. Really, of
      course, he is as much pulled by Jesuit wires as any Sanfedist in the
      country. This mission was suggested by some of the Jesuit fathers. He is
      one of the most brilliant preachers in the Church, and as mischievous in
      his way as Lambruschini himself. His business is to keep the popular
      enthusiasm over the Pope from subsiding, and to occupy the public
      attention until the Grand Duke has signed a project which the agents of
      the Jesuits are preparing to lay before him. What this project is I have
      been unable to discover.&rsquo; Then, further on, it says: &lsquo;Whether Montanelli
      understands for what purpose he is being sent to Tuscany, or whether the
      Jesuits are playing on him, I cannot make out. He is either an uncommonly
      clever knave, or the biggest ass that was ever foaled. The odd thing is
      that, so far as I can discover, he neither takes bribes nor keeps
      mistresses&mdash;the first time I ever came across such a thing.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He laid down the letter and sat looking at her with half-shut eyes,
      waiting, apparently, for her to speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you satisfied that your informant is correct in his facts?&rdquo; she asked
      after a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As to the irreproachable character of Monsignor M-mon-t-tan-nelli&rsquo;s
      private life? No; but neither is he. As you will observe, he puts in the
      s-s-saving clause: &lsquo;So far as I c-can discover&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was not speaking of that,&rdquo; she interposed coldly, &ldquo;but of the part
      about this mission.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can fully trust the writer. He is an old friend of mine&mdash;one of my
      comrades of &lsquo;43, and he is in a position which gives him exceptional
      opportunities for finding out things of that kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some official at the Vatican,&rdquo; thought Gemma quickly. &ldquo;So that&rsquo;s the kind
      of connections you have? I guessed there was something of that sort.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This letter is, of course, a private one,&rdquo; the Gadfly went on; &ldquo;and you
      understand that the information is to be kept strictly to the members of
      your committee.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That hardly needs saying. Then about the pamphlet: may I tell the
      committee that you consent to make a few alterations and soften it a
      little, or that&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you think the alterations may succeed in spoiling the beauty of the
      &lsquo;literary composition,&rsquo; signora, as well as in reducing the vehemence of
      the tone?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are asking my personal opinion. What I have come here to express is
      that of the committee as a whole.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Does that imply that y-y-you disagree with the committee as a whole?&rdquo; He
      had put the letter into his pocket and was now leaning forward and looking
      at her with an eager, concentrated expression which quite changed the
      character of his face. &ldquo;You think&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you care to know what I personally think&mdash;I disagree with the
      majority on both points. I do not at all admire the pamphlet from a
      literary point of view, and I do think it true as a presentation of facts
      and wise as a matter of tactics.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I quite agree with you that Italy is being led away by a will-o&rsquo;-the-wisp
      and that all this enthusiasm and rejoicing will probably land her in a
      terrible bog; and I should be most heartily glad to have that openly and
      boldly said, even at the cost of offending or alienating some of our
      present supporters. But as a member of a body the large majority of which
      holds the opposite view, I cannot insist upon my personal opinion; and I
      certainly think that if things of that kind are to be said at all, they
      should be said temperately and quietly; not in the tone adopted in this
      pamphlet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will you wait a minute while I look through the manuscript?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He took it up and glanced down the pages. A dissatisfied frown settled on
      his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, of course, you are perfectly right. The thing&rsquo;s written like a cafe
      chantant skit, not a political satire. But what&rsquo;s a man to do? If I write
      decently the public won&rsquo;t understand it; they will say it&rsquo;s dull if it
      isn&rsquo;t spiteful enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you think spitefulness manages to be dull when we get too much of
      it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He threw a keen, rapid glance at her, and burst out laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Apparently the signora belongs to the dreadful category of people who are
      always right! Then if I yield to the temptation to be spiteful, I may come
      in time to be as dull as Signora Grassini? Heavens, what a fate! No, you
      needn&rsquo;t frown. I know you don&rsquo;t like me, and I am going to keep to
      business. What it comes to, then, is practically this: if I cut out the
      personalities and leave the essential part of the thing as it is, the
      committee will very much regret that they can&rsquo;t take the responsibility of
      printing it. If I cut out the political truth and make all the hard names
      apply to no one but the party&rsquo;s enemies, the committee will praise the
      thing up to the skies, and you and I will know it&rsquo;s not worth printing.
      Rather a nice point of metaphysics: Which is the more desirable condition,
      to be printed and not be worth it, or to be worth it and not be printed?
      Well, signora?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do not think you are tied to any such alternative. I believe that if
      you were to cut out the personalities the committee would consent to print
      the pamphlet, though the majority would, of course, not agree with it; and
      I am convinced that it would be very useful. But you would have to lay
      aside the spitefulness. If you are going to say a thing the substance of
      which is a big pill for your readers to swallow, there is no use in
      frightening them at the beginning by the form.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He sighed and shrugged his shoulders resignedly. &ldquo;I submit, signora; but
      on one condition. If you rob me of my laugh now, I must have it out next
      time. When His Eminence, the irreproachable Cardinal, turns up in
      Florence, neither you nor your committee must object to my being as
      spiteful as I like. It&rsquo;s my due!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He spoke in his lightest, coldest manner, pulling the chrysanthemums out
      of their vase and holding them up to watch the light through the
      translucent petals. &ldquo;What an unsteady hand he has,&rdquo; she thought, seeing
      how the flowers shook and quivered. &ldquo;Surely he doesn&rsquo;t drink!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You had better discuss the matter with the other members of the
      committee,&rdquo; she said, rising. &ldquo;I cannot form any opinion as to what they
      will think about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you?&rdquo; He had risen too, and was leaning against the table, pressing
      the flowers to his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      She hesitated. The question distressed her, bringing up old and miserable
      associations. &ldquo;I&mdash;hardly know,&rdquo; she said at last. &ldquo;Many years ago I
      used to know something about Monsignor Montanelli. He was only a canon at
      that time, and Director of the theological seminary in the province where
      I lived as a girl. I heard a great deal about him from&mdash;someone who
      knew him very intimately; and I never heard anything of him that was not
      good. I believe that, in those days at least, he was really a most
      remarkable man. But that was long ago, and he may have changed.
      Irresponsible power corrupts so many people.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly raised his head from the flowers, and looked at her with a
      steady face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At any rate,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;if Monsignor Montanelli is not himself a
      scoundrel, he is a tool in scoundrelly hands. It is all one to me which he
      is&mdash;and to my friends across the frontier. A stone in the path may
      have the best intentions, but it must be kicked out of the path, for all
      that. Allow me, signora!&rdquo; He rang the bell, and, limping to the door,
      opened it for her to pass out.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was very kind of you to call, signora. May I send for a vettura? No?
      Good-afternoon, then! Bianca, open the hall-door, please.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gemma went out into the street, pondering anxiously. &ldquo;My friends across
      the frontier&rdquo;&mdash;who were they? And how was the stone to be kicked out
      of the path? If with satire only, why had he said it with such dangerous
      eyes?
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0011" id="link2HCH0011">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
