<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
   <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      IV
    </h2>
    <p>
      ARTHUR went back to his lodgings feeling as though he had wings. He was
      absolutely, cloudlessly happy. At the meeting there had been hints of
      preparations for armed insurrection; and now Gemma was a comrade, and he
      loved her. They could work together, possibly even die together, for the
      Republic that was to be. The blossoming time of their hope was come, and
      the Padre would see it and believe.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next morning, however, he awoke in a soberer mood and remembered that
      Gemma was going to Leghorn and the Padre to Rome. January, February, March&mdash;three
      long months to Easter! And if Gemma should fall under &ldquo;Protestant&rdquo;
       influences at home (in Arthur&rsquo;s vocabulary &ldquo;Protestant&rdquo; stood for
      &ldquo;Philistine&rdquo;)&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;No, Gemma would never learn to flirt and
      simper and captivate tourists and bald-headed shipowners, like the other
      English girls in Leghorn; she was made of different stuff. But she might
      be very miserable; she was so young, so friendless, so utterly alone among
      all those wooden people. If only mother had lived&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      In the evening he went to the seminary, where he found Montanelli
      entertaining the new Director and looking both tired and bored. Instead of
      lighting up, as usual, at the sight of Arthur, the Padre&rsquo;s face grew
      darker.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is the student I spoke to you about,&rdquo; he said, introducing Arthur
      stiffly. &ldquo;I shall be much obliged if you will allow him to continue using
      the library.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Father Cardi, a benevolent-looking elderly priest, at once began talking
      to Arthur about the Sapienza, with an ease and familiarity which showed
      him to be well acquainted with college life. The conversation soon drifted
      into a discussion of university regulations, a burning question of that
      day. To Arthur&rsquo;s great delight, the new Director spoke strongly against
      the custom adopted by the university authorities of constantly worrying
      the students by senseless and vexatious restrictions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have had a good deal of experience in guiding young people,&rdquo; he said;
      &ldquo;and I make it a rule never to prohibit anything without a good reason.
      There are very few young men who will give much trouble if proper
      consideration and respect for their personality are shown to them. But, of
      course, the most docile horse will kick if you are always jerking at the
      rein.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur opened his eyes wide; he had not expected to hear the students&rsquo;
      cause pleaded by the new Director. Montanelli took no part in the
      discussion; its subject, apparently, did not interest him. The expression
      of his face was so unutterably hopeless and weary that Father Cardi broke
      off suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am afraid I have overtired you, Canon. You must forgive my
      talkativeness; I am hot upon this subject and forget that others may grow
      weary of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;On the contrary, I was much interested.&rdquo; Montanelli was not given to
      stereotyped politeness, and his tone jarred uncomfortably upon Arthur.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Father Cardi went to his own room Montanelli turned to Arthur with
      the intent and brooding look that his face had worn all the evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Arthur, my dear boy,&rdquo; he began slowly; &ldquo;I have something to tell you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He must have had bad news,&rdquo; flashed through Arthur&rsquo;s mind, as he looked
      anxiously at the haggard face. There was a long pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you like the new Director?&rdquo; Montanelli asked suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The question was so unexpected that, for a moment, Arthur was at a loss
      how to reply to it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;I like him very much, I think&mdash;at least&mdash;no, I am not
      quite sure that I do. But it is difficult to say, after seeing a person
      once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli sat beating his hand gently on the arm of his chair; a habit
      with him when anxious or perplexed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About this journey to Rome,&rdquo; he began again; &ldquo;if you think there is any&mdash;well&mdash;if
      you wish it, Arthur, I will write and say I cannot go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Padre! But the Vatican&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Vatican will find someone else. I can send apologies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why? I can&rsquo;t understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli drew one hand across his forehead.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am anxious about you. Things keep coming into my head&mdash;and after
      all, there is no need for me to go&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But the bishopric&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Arthur! what shall it profit me if I gain a bishopric and lose&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He broke off. Arthur had never seen him like this before, and was greatly
      troubled.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t understand,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Padre, if you could explain to me more&mdash;more
      definitely, what it is you think&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think nothing; I am haunted with a horrible fear. Tell me, is there any
      special danger?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He has heard something,&rdquo; Arthur thought, remembering the whispers of a
      projected revolt. But the secret was not his to tell; and he merely
      answered: &ldquo;What special danger should there be?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t question me&mdash;answer me!&rdquo; Montanelli&rsquo;s voice was almost harsh
      in its eagerness. &ldquo;Are you in danger? I don&rsquo;t want to know your secrets;
      only tell me that!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are all in God&rsquo;s hands, Padre; anything may always happen. But I know
      of no reason why I should not be here alive and safe when you come back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When I come back&mdash;&mdash;Listen, carino; I will leave it in your
      hands. You need give me no reason; only say to me, &lsquo;Stay,&rsquo; and I will give
      up this journey. There will be no injury to anyone, and I shall feel you
      are safer if I have you beside me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This kind of morbid fancifulness was so foreign to Montanelli&rsquo;s character
      that Arthur looked at him with grave anxiety.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Padre, I am sure you are not well. Of course you must go to Rome, and try
      to have a thorough rest and get rid of your sleeplessness and headaches.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; Montanelli interrupted, as if tired of the subject; &ldquo;I will
      start by the early coach to-morrow morning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur looked at him, wondering.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You had something to tell me?&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, no; nothing more&mdash;nothing of any consequence.&rdquo; There was a
      startled, almost terrified look in his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      A few days after Montanelli&rsquo;s departure Arthur went to fetch a book from
      the seminary library, and met Father Cardi on the stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, Mr. Burton!&rdquo; exclaimed the Director; &ldquo;the very person I wanted.
      Please come in and help me out of a difficulty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He opened the study door, and Arthur followed him into the room with a
      foolish, secret sense of resentment. It seemed hard to see this dear
      study, the Padre&rsquo;s own private sanctum, invaded by a stranger.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am a terrible book-worm,&rdquo; said the Director; &ldquo;and my first act when I
      got here was to examine the library. It seems very interesting, but I do
      not understand the system by which it is catalogued.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The catalogue is imperfect; many of the best books have been added to the
      collection lately.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Can you spare half an hour to explain the arrangement to me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They went into the library, and Arthur carefully explained the catalogue.
      When he rose to take his hat, the Director interfered, laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, no! I can&rsquo;t have you rushing off in that way. It is Saturday, and
      quite time for you to leave off work till Monday morning. Stop and have
      supper with me, now I have kept you so late. I am quite alone, and shall
      be glad of company.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His manner was so bright and pleasant that Arthur felt at ease with him at
      once. After some desultory conversation, the Director inquired how long he
      had known Montanelli.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For about seven years. He came back from China when I was twelve years
      old.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, yes! It was there that he gained his reputation as a missionary
      preacher. Have you been his pupil ever since?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He began teaching me a year later, about the time when I first confessed
      to him. Since I have been at the Sapienza he has still gone on helping me
      with anything I wanted to study that was not in the regular course. He has
      been very kind to me&mdash;you can hardly imagine how kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can well believe it; he is a man whom no one can fail to admire&mdash;a
      most noble and beautiful nature. I have met priests who were out in China
      with him; and they had no words high enough to praise his energy and
      courage under all hardships, and his unfailing devotion. You are fortunate
      to have had in your youth the help and guidance of such a man. I
      understood from him that you have lost both parents.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; my father died when I was a child, and my mother a year ago.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you brothers and sisters?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; I have step-brothers; but they were business men when I was in the
      nursery.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must have had a lonely childhood; perhaps you value Canon
      Montanelli&rsquo;s kindness the more for that. By the way, have you chosen a
      confessor for the time of his absence?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought of going to one of the fathers of Santa Caterina, if they have
      not too many penitents.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will you confess to me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur opened his eyes in wonder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Reverend Father, of course I&mdash;should be glad; only&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Only the Director of a theological seminary does not usually receive lay
      penitents? That is quite true. But I know Canon Montanelli takes a great
      interest in you, and I fancy he is a little anxious on your behalf&mdash;just
      as I should be if I were leaving a favourite pupil&mdash;and would like to
      know you were under the spiritual guidance of his colleague. And, to be
      quite frank with you, my son, I like you, and should be glad to give you
      any help I can.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you put it that way, of course I shall be very grateful for your
      guidance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you will come to me next month? That&rsquo;s right. And run in to see me,
      my lad, when you have time any evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Shortly before Easter Montanelli&rsquo;s appointment to the little see of
      Brisighella, in the Etruscan Apennines, was officially announced. He wrote
      to Arthur from Rome in a cheerful and tranquil spirit; evidently his
      depression was passing over. &ldquo;You must come to see me every vacation,&rdquo; he
      wrote; &ldquo;and I shall often be coming to Pisa; so I hope to see a good deal
      of you, if not so much as I should wish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Dr. Warren had invited Arthur to spend the Easter holidays with him and
      his children, instead of in the dreary, rat-ridden old place where Julia
      now reigned supreme. Enclosed in the letter was a short note, scrawled in
      Gemma&rsquo;s childish, irregular handwriting, begging him to come if possible,
      &ldquo;as I want to talk to you about something.&rdquo; Still more encouraging was the
      whispered communication passing around from student to student in the
      university; everyone was to be prepared for great things after Easter.
    </p>
    <p>
      All this had put Arthur into a state of rapturous anticipation, in which
      the wildest improbabilities hinted at among the students seemed to him
      natural and likely to be realized within the next two months.
    </p>
    <p>
      He arranged to go home on Thursday in Passion week, and to spend the first
      days of the vacation there, that the pleasure of visiting the Warrens and
      the delight of seeing Gemma might not unfit him for the solemn religious
      meditation demanded by the Church from all her children at this season. He
      wrote to Gemma, promising to come on Easter Monday; and went up to his
      bedroom on Wednesday night with a soul at peace.
    </p>
    <p>
      He knelt down before the crucifix. Father Cardi had promised to receive
      him in the morning; and for this, his last confession before the Easter
      communion, he must prepare himself by long and earnest prayer. Kneeling
      with clasped hands and bent head, he looked back over the month, and
      reckoned up the miniature sins of impatience, carelessness, hastiness of
      temper, which had left their faint, small spots upon the whiteness of his
      soul. Beyond these he could find nothing; in this month he had been too
      happy to sin much. He crossed himself, and, rising, began to undress.
    </p>
    <p>
      As he unfastened his shirt a scrap of paper slipped from it and fluttered
      to the floor. It was Gemma&rsquo;s letter, which he had worn all day upon his
      neck. He picked it up, unfolded it, and kissed the dear scribble; then
      began folding the paper up again, with a dim consciousness of having done
      something very ridiculous, when he noticed on the back of the sheet a
      postscript which he had not read before. &ldquo;Be sure and come as soon as
      possible,&rdquo; it ran, &ldquo;for I want you to meet Bolla. He has been staying
      here, and we have read together every day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The hot colour went up to Arthur&rsquo;s forehead as he read.
    </p>
    <p>
      Always Bolla! What was he doing in Leghorn again? And why should Gemma
      want to read with him? Had he bewitched her with his smuggling? It had
      been quite easy to see at the meeting in January that he was in love with
      her; that was why he had been so earnest over his propaganda. And now he
      was close to her&mdash;reading with her every day.
    </p>
    <p>
      Arthur suddenly threw the letter aside and knelt down again before the
      crucifix. And this was the soul that was preparing for absolution, for the
      Easter sacrament&mdash;the soul at peace with God and itself and all the
      world! A soul capable of sordid jealousies and suspicions; of selfish
      animosities and ungenerous hatred&mdash;and against a comrade! He covered
      his face with both hands in bitter humiliation. Only five minutes ago he
      had been dreaming of martyrdom; and now he had been guilty of a mean and
      petty thought like this!
    </p>
    <p>
      When he entered the seminary chapel on Thursday morning he found Father
      Cardi alone. After repeating the Confiteor, he plunged at once into the
      subject of his last night&rsquo;s backsliding.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My father, I accuse myself of the sins of jealousy and anger, and of
      unworthy thoughts against one who has done me no wrong.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Farther Cardi knew quite well with what kind of penitent he had to deal.
      He only said softly:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have not told me all, my son.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Father, the man against whom I have thought an unchristian thought is one
      whom I am especially bound to love and honour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One to whom you are bound by ties of blood?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By a still closer tie.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By what tie, my son?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By that of comradeship.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Comradeship in what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In a great and holy work.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A little pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And your anger against this&mdash;comrade, your jealousy of him, was
      called forth by his success in that work being greater than yours?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;yes, partly. I envied him his experience&mdash;his usefulness.
      And then&mdash;I thought&mdash;I feared&mdash;that he would take from me
      the heart of the girl I&mdash;love.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And this girl that you love, is she a daughter of the Holy Church?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; she is a Protestant.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A heretic?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur clasped his hands in great distress. &ldquo;Yes, a heretic,&rdquo; he repeated.
      &ldquo;We were brought up together; our mothers were friends&mdash;and I&mdash;envied
      him, because I saw that he loves her, too, and because&mdash;because&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My son,&rdquo; said Father Cardi, speaking after a moment&rsquo;s silence, slowly and
      gravely, &ldquo;you have still not told me all; there is more than this upon
      your soul.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Father, I&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; He faltered and broke off again.
    </p>
    <p>
      The priest waited silently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I envied him because the society&mdash;the Young Italy&mdash;that I
      belong to&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Intrusted him with a work that I had hoped&mdash;would be given to me,
      that I had thought myself&mdash;specially adapted for.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What work?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The taking in of books&mdash;political books&mdash;from the steamers that
      bring them&mdash;and finding a hiding place for them&mdash;in the town&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And this work was given by the party to your rival?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To Bolla&mdash;and I envied him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And he gave you no cause for this feeling? You do not accuse him of
      having neglected the mission intrusted to him?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, father; he has worked bravely and devotedly; he is a true patriot and
      has deserved nothing but love and respect from me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Father Cardi pondered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My son, if there is within you a new light, a dream of some great work to
      be accomplished for your fellow-men, a hope that shall lighten the burdens
      of the weary and oppressed, take heed how you deal with the most precious
      blessing of God. All good things are of His giving; and of His giving is
      the new birth. If you have found the way of sacrifice, the way that leads
      to peace; if you have joined with loving comrades to bring deliverance to
      them that weep and mourn in secret; then see to it that your soul be free
      from envy and passion and your heart as an altar where the sacred fire
      burns eternally. Remember that this is a high and holy thing, and that the
      heart which would receive it must be purified from every selfish thought.
      This vocation is as the vocation of a priest; it is not for the love of a
      woman, nor for the moment of a fleeting passion; it is FOR GOD AND THE
      PEOPLE; it is NOW AND FOREVER.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; Arthur started and clasped his hands; he had almost burst out
      sobbing at the motto. &ldquo;Father, you give us the sanction of the Church!
      Christ is on our side&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My son,&rdquo; the priest answered solemnly, &ldquo;Christ drove the moneychangers
      out of the Temple, for His House shall be called a House of Prayer, and
      they had made it a den of thieves.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      After a long silence, Arthur whispered tremulously:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And Italy shall be His Temple when they are driven out&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stopped; and the soft answer came back:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;The earth and the fulness thereof are mine, saith the Lord.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0005" id="link2HCH0005">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
