<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      VIII
    </h2>
    <p>
      &ldquo;INTROIBO ad altare Dei.&rdquo; Montanelli stood before the high altar among his
      ministers and acolytes and read the Introit aloud in steady tones. All the
      Cathedral was a blaze of light and colour; from the holiday dresses of the
      congregation to the pillars with their flaming draperies and wreaths of
      flowers there was no dull spot in it. Over the open spaces of the doorway
      fell great scarlet curtains, through whose folds the hot June sunlight
      glowed, as through the petals of red poppies in a corn-field. The
      religious orders with their candles and torches, the companies of the
      parishes with their crosses and flags, lighted up the dim side-chapels;
      and in the aisles the silken folds of the processional banners drooped,
      their gilded staves and tassels glinting under the arches. The surplices
      of the choristers gleamed, rainbow-tinted, beneath the coloured windows;
      the sunlight lay on the chancel floor in chequered stains of orange and
      purple and green. Behind the altar hung a shimmering veil of silver
      tissue; and against the veil and the decorations and the altar-lights the
      Cardinal&rsquo;s figure stood out in its trailing white robes like a marble
      statue that had come to life.
    </p>
    <p>
      As was customary on processional days, he was only to preside at the Mass,
      not to celebrate, so at the end of the Indulgentiam he turned from the
      altar and walked slowly to the episcopal throne, celebrant and ministers
      bowing low as he passed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid His Eminence is not well,&rdquo; one of the canons whispered to his
      neighbour; &ldquo;he seems so strange.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli bent his head to receive the jewelled mitre. The priest who was
      acting as deacon of honour put it on, looked at him for an instant, then
      leaned forward and whispered softly:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your Eminence, are you ill?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli turned slightly towards him. There was no recognition in his
      eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pardon, Your Eminence!&rdquo; the priest whispered, as he made a genuflexion
      and went back to his place, reproaching himself for having interrupted the
      Cardinal&rsquo;s devotions.
    </p>
    <p>
      The familiar ceremony went on; and Montanelli sat erect and still, his
      glittering mitre and gold-brocaded vestments flashing back the sunlight,
      and the heavy folds of his white festival mantle sweeping down over the
      red carpet. The light of a hundred candles sparkled among the sapphires on
      his breast, and shone into the deep, still eyes that had no answering
      gleam; and when, at the words: &ldquo;Benedicite, pater eminentissime,&rdquo; he
      stooped to bless the incense, and the sunbeams played among the diamonds,
      he might have recalled some splendid and fearful ice-spirit of the
      mountains, crowned with rainbows and robed in drifted snow, scattering,
      with extended hands, a shower of blessings or of curses.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the elevation of the Host he descended from his throne and knelt before
      the altar. There was a strange, still evenness about all his movements;
      and as he rose and went back to his place the major of dragoons, who was
      sitting in gala uniform behind the Governor, whispered to the wounded
      captain: &ldquo;The old Cardinal&rsquo;s breaking, not a doubt of it. He goes through
      his work like a machine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So much the better!&rdquo; the captain whispered back. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s been nothing but a
      mill-stone round all our necks ever since that confounded amnesty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He did give in, though, about the court-martial.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, at last; but he was a precious time making up his mind to. Heavens,
      how close it is! We shall all get sun-stroke in the procession. It&rsquo;s a
      pity we&rsquo;re not Cardinals, to have a canopy held over our heads all the way&mdash;&mdash;
      Sh-sh-sh! There&rsquo;s my uncle looking at us!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Colonel Ferrari had turned round to glance severely at the two younger
      officers. After the solemn event of yesterday morning he was in a devout
      and serious frame of mind, and inclined to reproach them with a want of
      proper feeling about what he regarded as &ldquo;a painful necessity of state.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The masters of the ceremonies began to assemble and place in order those
      who were to take part in the procession. Colonel Ferrari rose from his
      place and moved up to the chancel-rail, beckoning to the other officers to
      accompany him. When the Mass was finished, and the Host had been placed
      behind the crystal shield in the processional sun, the celebrant and his
      ministers retired to the sacristy to change their vestments, and a little
      buzz of whispered conversation broke out through the church. Montanelli
      remained seated on his throne, looking straight before him, immovably. All
      the sea of human life and motion seemed to surge around and below him, and
      to die away into stillness about his feet. A censer was brought to him;
      and he raised his hand with the action of an automaton, and put the
      incense into the vessel, looking neither to the right nor to the left.
    </p>
    <p>
      The clergy had come back from the sacristy, and were waiting in the
      chancel for him to descend; but he remained utterly motionless. The deacon
      of honour, bending forward to take off the mitre, whispered again,
      hesitatingly:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your Eminence!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Cardinal looked round.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What did you say?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you quite sure the procession will not be too much for you? The sun
      is very hot.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does the sun matter?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli spoke in a cold, measured voice, and the priest again fancied
      that he must have given offence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Forgive me, Your Eminence. I thought you seemed unwell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli rose without answering. He paused a moment on the upper step of
      the throne, and asked in the same measured way:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The long train of his mantle swept down over the steps and lay spread out
      on the chancel-floor, and he was pointing to a fiery stain on the white
      satin.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only the sunlight shining through a coloured window, Your Eminence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The sunlight? Is it so red?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He descended the steps, and knelt before the altar, swinging the censer
      slowly to and fro. As he handed it back, the chequered sunlight fell on
      his bared head and wide, uplifted eyes, and cast a crimson glow across the
      white veil that his ministers were folding round him.
    </p>
    <p>
      He took from the deacon the sacred golden sun; and stood up, as choir and
      organ burst into a peal of triumphal melody.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       &ldquo;Pange, lingua, g]oriosi
        Corporis mysterium,
        Sanguinisque pretiosi
        Quem in mundi pretium,
        Fructus ventris generosi
        Rex effudit gentium.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      The bearers came slowly forward, and raised the silken canopy over his
      head, while the deacons of honour stepped to their places at his right and
      left and drew back the long folds of the mantle. As the acolytes stooped
      to lift his robe from the chancel-floor, the lay fraternities heading the
      procession started to pace down the nave in stately double file, with
      lighted candles held to left and right.
    </p>
    <p>
      He stood above them, by the altar, motionless under the white canopy,
      holding the Eucharist aloft with steady hands, and watched them as they
      passed. Two by two, with candles and banners and torches, with crosses and
      images and flags, they swept slowly down the chancel steps, along the
      broad nave between the garlanded pillars, and out under the lifted scarlet
      curtains into the blazing sunlight of the street; and the sound of their
      chanting died into a rolling murmur, drowned in the pealing of new and
      newer voices, as the unending stream flowed on, and yet new footsteps
      echoed down the nave.
    </p>
    <p>
      The companies of the parishes passed, with their white shrouds and veiled
      faces; then the brothers of the Misericordia, black from head to foot,
      their eyes faintly gleaming through the holes in their masks. Next came
      the monks in solemn row: the mendicant friars, with their dusky cowls and
      bare, brown feet; the white-robed, grave Dominicans. Then followed the lay
      officials of the district; dragoons and carabineers and the local
      police-officials; the Governor in gala uniform, with his brother officers
      beside him. A deacon followed, holding up a great cross between two
      acolytes with gleaming candles; and as the curtains were lifted high to
      let them pass out at the doorway, Montanelli caught a momentary glimpse,
      from where he stood under the canopy, of the sunlit blaze of carpeted
      street and flag-hung walls and white-robed children scattering roses. Ah,
      the roses; how red they were!
    </p>
    <p>
      On and on the procession paced in order; form succeeding to form and
      colour to colour. Long white surplices, grave and seemly, gave place to
      gorgeous vestments and embroidered pluvials. Now passed a tall and slender
      golden cross, borne high above the lighted candles; now the cathedral
      canons, stately in their dead white mantles. A chaplain paced down the
      chancel, with the crozier between two flaring torches; then the acolytes
      moved forward in step, their censers swinging to the rhythm of the music;
      the bearers raised the canopy higher, counting their steps: &ldquo;One, two;
      one, two!&rdquo; and Montanelli started upon the Way of the Cross.
    </p>
    <p>
      Down the chancel steps and all along the nave he passed; under the gallery
      where the organ pealed and thundered; under the lifted curtains that were
      so red&mdash;so fearfully red; and out into the glaring street, where the
      blood-red roses lay and withered, crushed into the red carpet by the
      passing of many feet. A moment&rsquo;s pause at the door, while the lay
      officials came forward to replace the canopy-bearers; then the procession
      moved on again, and he with it, his hands clasping the Eucharistic sun,
      and the voices of the choristers swelling and dying around him, with the
      rhythmical swaying of censers and the rolling tramp of feet.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       &ldquo;Verbum caro, panem verum,
        Verbo carnem efficit;
        Sitque sanguis Christi merum&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Always blood and always blood! The carpet stretched before him like a red
      river; the roses lay like blood splashed on the stones&mdash;&mdash; Oh,
      God! Is all Thine earth grown red, and all Thy heaven? Ah, what is it to
      Thee, Thou mighty God&mdash;&mdash;Thou, whose very lips are smeared with
      blood!
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       &ldquo;Tantum ergo Sacramentum,
        Veneremur cernui.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      He looked through the crystal shield at the Eucharist. What was that
      oozing from the wafer&mdash;dripping down between the points of the golden
      sun&mdash;down on to his white robe? What had he seen dripping down&mdash;dripping
      from a lifted hand?
    </p>
    <p>
      The grass in the courtyard was trampled and red,&mdash;all red,&mdash;there
      was so much blood. It was trickling down the cheek, and dripping from the
      pierced right hand, and gushing in a hot red torrent from the wounded
      side. Even a lock of the hair was dabbled in it,&mdash;the hair that lay
      all wet and matted on the forehead&mdash;ah, that was the death-sweat; it
      came from the horrible pain.
    </p>
    <p>
      The voices of the choristers rose higher, triumphantly:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       &ldquo;Genitori, genitoque,
        Laus et jubilatio,
        Salus, honor, virtus quoque,
        Sit et benedictio.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Oh, that is more than any patience can endure! God, Who sittest on the
      brazen heavens enthroned, and smilest with bloody lips, looking down upon
      agony and death, is it not enough? Is it not enough, without this mockery
      of praise and blessing? Body of Christ, Thou that wast broken for the
      salvation of men; blood of Christ, Thou that wast shed for the remission
      of sins; is it not enough?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, call Him louder; perchance He sleepeth!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dost Thou sleep indeed, dear love; and wilt Thou never wake again? Is the
      grave so jealous of its victory; and will the black pit under the tree not
      loose Thee even for a little, heart&rsquo;s delight?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then the Thing behind the crystal shield made answer, and the blood
      dripped down as It spoke:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hast thou chosen, and wilt repent of thy choice? Is thy desire not
      fulfilled? Look upon these men that walk in the light and are clad in silk
      and in gold: for their sake was I laid in the black pit. Look upon the
      children scattering roses, and hearken to their singing if it be sweet:
      for their sake is my mouth filled with dust, and the roses are red from
      the well-springs of my heart. See where the people kneel to drink the
      blood that drips from thy garment-hem: for their sake was it shed, to
      quench their ravening thirst. For it is written: &lsquo;Greater love hath no man
      than this, if a man lay down his life for his friends.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Arthur, Arthur; there is greater love than this! If a man lay down
      the life of his best beloved, is not that greater?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And It answered again:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who is thy best beloved? In sooth, not I.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And when he would have spoken the words froze on his tongue, for the
      singing of the choristers passed over them, as the north wind over icy
      pools, and hushed them into silence:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     &ldquo;Dedit fragilibus corporis ferculum,
      Dedit et tristibus sanguinis poculum,
      Dicens: Accipite, quod trado vasculum
              Omnes ex eo bibite.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Drink of it, Christians; drink of it, all of you! Is it not yours? For you
      the red stream stains the grass; for you the living flesh is seared and
      torn. Eat of it, cannibals; eat of it, all of you! This is your feast and
      your orgy; this is the day of your joy! Haste you and come to the
      festival; join the procession and march with us; women and children, young
      men and old men&mdash;come to the sharing of flesh! Come to the pouring of
      blood-wine and drink of it while it is red; take and eat of the Body&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, God; the fortress! Sullen and brown, with crumbling battlements and
      towers dark among the barren hills, it scowled on the procession sweeping
      past in the dusty road below. The iron teeth of the portcullis were drawn
      down over the mouth of the gate; and as a beast crouched on the
      mountain-side, the fortress guarded its prey. Yet, be the teeth clenched
      never so fast, they shall be broken and riven asunder; and the grave in
      the courtyard within shall yield up her dead. For the Christian hosts are
      marching, marching in mighty procession to their sacramental feast of
      blood, as marches an army of famished rats to the gleaning; and their cry
      is: &ldquo;Give! Give!&rdquo; and they say not: &ldquo;It is enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wilt thou not be satisfied? For these men was I sacrificed; thou hast
      destroyed me that they might live; and behold, they march everyone on his
      ways, and they shall not break their ranks.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is the army of Christians, the followers of thy God; a great people
      and a strong. A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame
      burneth; the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a
      desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing shall escape them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yet come back, come back to me, beloved; for I repent me of my
      choice! Come back, and we will creep away together, to some dark and
      silent grave where the devouring army shall not find us; and we will lay
      us down there, locked in one another&rsquo;s arms, and sleep, and sleep, and
      sleep. And the hungry Christians shall pass by in the merciless daylight
      above our heads; and when they howl for blood to drink and for flesh to
      eat, their cry shall be faint in our ears; and they shall pass on their
      ways and leave us to our rest.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And It answered yet again:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where shall I hide me? Is it not written: &lsquo;They shall run to and fro in
      the city; they shall run upon the wall; they shall climb up upon the
      houses; they shall enter in at the windows like a thief?&rsquo; If I build me a
      tomb on the mountain-top, shall they not break it open? If I dig me a
      grave in the river-bed, shall they not tear it up? Verily, they are keen
      as blood-hounds to seek out their prey; and for them are my wounds red,
      that they may drink. Canst thou not hear them, what they sing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And they sang, as they went in between the scarlet curtains of the
      Cathedral door; for the procession was over, and all the roses were
      strewn:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       &ldquo;Ave, verum Corpus, natum
        De Maria Virgine:
        Vere passum, immolatum
        In cruce pro homine!
        Cujus latus perforatum
        Undam fluxit cum sanguinae;
        Esto nobis praegustatum
        Mortis in examinae.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      And when they had left off singing, he entered at the doorway, and passed
      between the silent rows of monks and priests, where they knelt, each man
      in his place, with the lighted candles uplifted. And he saw their hungry
      eyes fixed on the sacred Body that he bore; and he knew why they bowed
      their heads as he passed. For the dark stream ran down the folds of his
      white vestments; and on the stones of the Cathedral floor his footsteps
      left a deep, red stain.
    </p>
    <p>
      So he passed up the nave to the chancel rails; and there the bearers
      paused, and he went out from under the canopy and up to the altar steps.
      To left and right the white-robed acolytes knelt with their censers and
      the chaplains with their torches; and their eyes shone greedily in the
      flaring light as they watched the Body of the Victim.
    </p>
    <p>
      And as he stood before the altar, holding aloft with blood-stained hands
      the torn and mangled body of his murdered love, the voices of the guests
      bidden to the Eucharistic feast rang out in another peal of song:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       &ldquo;Oh salutaris Hostia,
        Quae coeli pandis ostium;
        Bella praemunt hostilia,
        Da robur, fer, auxilium!&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Ah, and now they come to take the Body&mdash;&mdash;Go then, dear heart,
      to thy bitter doom, and open the gates of heaven for these ravening wolves
      that will not be denied. The gates that are opened for me are the gates of
      the nethermost hell.
    </p>
    <p>
      And as the deacon of honour placed the sacred vessel on the altar,
      Montanelli sank down where he had stood, and knelt upon the step; and from
      the white altar above him the blood flowed down and dripped upon his head.
      And the voices of the singers rang on, pealing under the arches and
      echoing along the vaulted roof:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       &ldquo;Uni trinoque Domino
        Sit sempiterna gloria:
        Qui vitam sine termino
        Nobis donet in patria.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sine termino&mdash;sine termino!&rdquo; Oh, happy Jesus, Who could sink beneath
      His cross! Oh, happy Jesus, Who could say: &ldquo;It is finished!&rdquo; This doom is
      never ended; it is eternal as the stars in their courses. This is the worm
      that dieth not and the fire that is not quenched. &ldquo;Sine termino, sine
      termino!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Wearily, patiently, he went through his part in the remaining ceremonies,
      fulfilling mechanically, from old habit, the rites that had no longer any
      meaning for him. Then, after the benediction, he knelt down again before
      the altar and covered his face; and the voice of the priest reading aloud
      the list of indulgences swelled and sank like a far-off murmur from a
      world to which he belonged no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      The voice broke off, and he stood up and stretched out his hand for
      silence. Some of the congregation were moving towards the doors; and they
      turned back with a hurried rustle and murmur, as a whisper went through
      the Cathedral:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;His Eminence is going to speak.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His ministers, startled and wondering, drew closer to him and one of them
      whispered hastily: &ldquo;Your Eminence, do you intend to speak to the people
      now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli silently waved him aside. The priests drew back, whispering
      together; the thing was unusual, even irregular; but it was within the
      Cardinal&rsquo;s prerogative if he chose to do it. No doubt, he had some
      statement of exceptional importance to make; some new reform from Rome to
      announce or a special communication from the Holy Father.
    </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli looked down from the altar-steps upon the sea of upturned
      faces. Full of eager expectancy they looked up at him as he stood above
      them, spectral and still and white.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sh-sh! Silence!&rdquo; the leaders of the procession called softly; and the
      murmuring of the congregation died into stillness, as a gust of wind dies
      among whispering tree-tops. All the crowd gazed up, in breathless silence,
      at the white figure on the altar-steps. Slowly and steadily he began to
      speak:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is written in the Gospel according to St. John: &lsquo;God so loved the
      world, that He gave His only begotten Son that the world through Him might
      be saved.&rsquo;
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is the festival of the Body and Blood of the Victim who was slain
      for your salvation; the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the
      world; the Son of God, Who died for your transgressions. And you are
      assembled here in solemn festival array, to eat of the sacrifice that was
      given for you, and to render thanks for this great mercy. And I know that
      this morning, when you came to share in the banquet, to eat of the Body of
      the Victim, your hearts were filled with joy, as you remembered the
      Passion of God the Son, Who died, that you might be saved.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But tell me, which among you has thought of that other Passion&mdash;of
      the Passion of God the Father, Who gave His Son to be crucified? Which of
      you has remembered the agony of God the Father, when He bent from His
      throne in the heavens above, and looked down upon Calvary?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have watched you to-day, my people, as you walked in your ranks in
      solemn procession; and I have seen that your hearts are glad within you
      for the remission of your sins, and that you rejoice in your salvation.
      Yet I pray you that you consider at what price that salvation was bought.
      Surely it is very precious, and the price of it is above rubies; it is the
      price of blood.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A faint, long shudder passed through the listening crowd. In the chancel
      the priests bent forward and whispered to one another; but the preacher
      went on speaking, and they held their peace.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Therefore it is that I speak with you this day: I AM THAT I AM. For I
      looked upon your weakness and your sorrow, and upon the little children
      about your feet; and my heart was moved to compassion for their sake, that
      they must die. Then I looked into my dear son&rsquo;s eyes; and I knew that the
      Atonement of Blood was there. And I went my way, and left him to his doom.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is the remission of sins. He died for you, and the darkness has
      swallowed him up; he is dead, and there is no resurrection; he is dead,
      and I have no son. Oh, my boy, my boy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Cardinal&rsquo;s voice broke in a long, wailing cry; and the voices of the
      terrified people answered it like an echo. All the clergy had risen from
      their places, and the deacons of honour started forward to lay their hands
      on the preacher&rsquo;s arm. But he wrenched it away, and faced them suddenly,
      with the eyes of an angry wild beast.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is this? Is there not blood enough? Wait your turn, jackals; you
      shall all be fed!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They shrank away and huddled shivering together, their panting breath
      thick and loud, their faces white with the whiteness of chalk. Montanelli
      turned again to the people, and they swayed and shook before him, as a
      field of corn before a hurricane.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have killed him! You have killed him! And I suffered it, because I
      would not let you die. And now, when you come about me with your lying
      praises and your unclean prayers, I repent me&mdash;I repent me that I
      have done this thing! It were better that you all should rot in your
      vices, in the bottomless filth of damnation, and that he should live. What
      is the worth of your plague-spotted souls, that such a price should be
      paid for them? But it is too late&mdash;too late! I cry aloud, but he does
      not hear me; I beat at the door of the grave, but he will not wake; I
      stand alone, in desert space, and look around me, from the blood-stained
      earth where the heart of my heart lies buried, to the void and awful
      heaven that is left unto me, desolate. I have given him up; oh, generation
      of vipers, I have given him up for you!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take your salvation, since it is yours! I fling it to you as a bone is
      flung to a pack of snarling curs! The price of your banquet is paid for
      you; come, then, and gorge yourselves, cannibals, bloodsuckers&mdash;carrion
      beasts that feed on the dead! See where the blood streams down from the
      altar, foaming and hot from my darling&rsquo;s heart&mdash;the blood that was
      shed for you! Wallow and lap it and smear yourselves red with it! Snatch
      and fight for the flesh and devour it&mdash;and trouble me no more! This
      is the body that was given for you&mdash;look at it, torn and bleeding,
      throbbing still with the tortured life, quivering from the bitter
      death-agony; take it, Christians, and eat!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He had caught up the sun with the Host and lifted it above his head; and
      now flung it crashing down upon the floor. At the ring of the metal on
      stone the clergy rushed forward together, and twenty hands seized the
      madman.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, and only then, the silence of the people broke in a wild, hysterical
      scream; and, overturning chairs and benches, beating at the doorways,
      trampling one upon another, tearing down curtains and garlands in their
      haste, the surging, sobbing human flood poured out upon the street.
    </p>
</section></body></html>
