<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      V
    </h2>
    <p>
      FOR a week the Gadfly lay in a fearful state. The attack was a violent
      one, and the Governor, rendered brutal by fear and perplexity, had not
      only chained him hand and foot, but had insisted on his being bound to his
      pallet with leather straps, drawn so tight that he could not move without
      their cutting into the flesh. He endured everything with his dogged,
      bitter stoicism till the end of the sixth day. Then his pride broke down,
      and he piteously entreated the prison doctor for a dose of opium. The
      doctor was quite willing to give it; but the Governor, hearing of the
      request, sharply forbade &ldquo;any such foolery.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you know what he wants it for?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s just as likely as
      not that he&rsquo;s shamming all the time and wants to drug the sentinel, or
      some such devilry. Rivarez is cunning enough for anything.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My giving him a dose would hardly help him to drug the sentinel,&rdquo; replied
      the doctor, unable to suppress a smile. &ldquo;And as for shamming&mdash;there&rsquo;s
      not much fear of that. He is as likely as not to die.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anyway, I won&rsquo;t have it given. If a man wants to be tenderly treated, he
      should behave accordingly. He has thoroughly deserved a little sharp
      discipline. Perhaps it will be a lesson to him not to play tricks with the
      window-bars again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The law does not admit of torture, though,&rdquo; the doctor ventured to say;
      &ldquo;and this is coming perilously near it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The law says nothing about opium, I think,&rdquo; said the Governor snappishly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is for you to decide, of course, colonel; but I hope you will let the
      straps be taken off at any rate. They are a needless aggravation of his
      misery. There&rsquo;s no fear of his escaping now. He couldn&rsquo;t stand if you let
      him go free.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My good sir, a doctor may make a mistake like other people, I suppose. I
      have got him safe strapped now, and he&rsquo;s going to stop so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At least, then, have the straps a little loosened. It is downright
      barbarity to keep them drawn so tight.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They will stop exactly as they are; and I will thank you, sir, not to
      talk about barbarity to me. If I do a thing, I have a reason for it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So the seventh night passed without any relief, and the soldier stationed
      on guard at the cell door crossed himself, shuddering, over and over
      again, as he listened all night long to heart-rending moans. The Gadfly&rsquo;s
      endurance was failing him at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      At six in the morning the sentinel, just before going off duty, unlocked
      the door softly and entered the cell. He knew that he was committing a
      serious breach of discipline, but could not bear to go away without
      offering the consolation of a friendly word.
    </p>
    <p>
      He found the Gadfly lying still, with closed eyes and parted lips. He
      stood silent for a moment; then stooped down and asked:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Can I do anything for you, sir? I have only a minute.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly opened his eyes. &ldquo;Let me alone!&rdquo; he moaned. &ldquo;Let me alone&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was asleep almost before the soldier had slipped back to his post.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ten days afterwards the Governor called again at the palace, but found
      that the Cardinal had gone to visit a sick man at Pieve d&rsquo;Ottavo, and was
      not expected home till the afternoon. That evening, just as he was sitting
      down to dinner, his servant came in to announce:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;His Eminence would like to speak to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Governor, with a hasty glance into the looking glass, to make sure
      that his uniform was in order, put on his most dignified air, and went
      into the reception room, where Montanelli was sitting, beating his hand
      gently on the arm of the chair and looking out of the window with an
      anxious line between his brows.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I heard that you called to-day,&rdquo; he said, cutting short the Governor&rsquo;s
      polite speeches with a slightly imperious manner which he never adopted in
      speaking to the country folk. &ldquo;It was probably on the business about which
      I have been wishing to speak to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was about Rivarez, Your Eminence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I supposed. I have been thinking the matter over these last few days.
      But before we go into that, I should like to hear whether you have
      anything new to tell me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Governor pulled his moustaches with an embarrassed air.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The fact is, I came to know whether Your Eminence had anything to tell
      me. If you still have an objection to the course I proposed taking, I
      should be sincerely glad of your advice in the matter; for, honestly, I
      don&rsquo;t know what to do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is there any new difficulty?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Only that next Thursday is the 3d of June,&mdash;Corpus Domini,&mdash;and
      somehow or other the matter must be settled before then.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thursday is Corpus Domini, certainly; but why must it be settled
      especially before then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am exceedingly sorry, Your Eminence, if I seem to oppose you, but I
      can&rsquo;t undertake to be responsible for the peace of the town if Rivarez is
      not got rid of before then. All the roughest set in the hills collects
      here for that day, as Your Eminence knows, and it is more than probable
      that they may attempt to break open the fortress gates and take him out.
      They won&rsquo;t succeed; I&rsquo;ll take care of that, if I have to sweep them from
      the gates with powder and shot. But we are very likely to have something
      of that kind before the day is over. Here in the Romagna there is bad
      blood in the people, and when once they get out their knives&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think with a little care we can prevent matters going as far as knives.
      I have always found the people of this district easy to get on with, if
      they are reasonably treated. Of course, if you once begin to threaten or
      coerce a Romagnol he becomes unmanageable. But have you any reason for
      supposing a new rescue scheme is intended?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I heard, both this morning and yesterday, from confidential agents of
      mine, that a great many rumours are circulating all over the district and
      that the people are evidently up to some mischief or other. But one can&rsquo;t
      find out the details; if one could it would be easier to take precautions.
      And for my part, after the fright we had the other day, I prefer to be on
      the safe side. With such a cunning fox as Rivarez one can&rsquo;t be too
      careful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The last I heard about Rivarez was that he was too ill to move or speak.
      Is he recovering, then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He seems much better now, Your Eminence. He certainly has been very ill&mdash;unless
      he was shamming all the time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you any reason for supposing that likely?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, the doctor seems convinced that it was all genuine; but it&rsquo;s a very
      mysterious kind of illness. Any way, he is recovering, and more
      intractable than ever.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What has he done now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s not much he can do, fortunately,&rdquo; the Governor answered, smiling
      as he remembered the straps. &ldquo;But his behaviour is something
      indescribable. Yesterday morning I went into the cell to ask him a few
      questions; he is not well enough yet to come to me for interrogation&mdash;and
      indeed, I thought it best not to run any risk of the people seeing him
      until he recovers. Such absurd stories always get about at once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you went there to interrogate him?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, Your Eminence. I hoped he would be more amenable to reason now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli looked him over deliberately, almost as if he had been
      inspecting a new and disagreeable animal. Fortunately, however, the
      Governor was fingering his sword-belt, and did not see the look. He went
      on placidly:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have not subjected him to any particular severities, but I have been
      obliged to be rather strict with him&mdash;especially as it is a military
      prison&mdash;and I thought that perhaps a little indulgence might have a
      good effect. I offered to relax the discipline considerably if he would
      behave in a reasonable manner; and how does Your Eminence suppose he
      answered me? He lay looking at me a minute, like a wolf in a cage, and
      then said quite softly: &lsquo;Colonel, I can&rsquo;t get up and strangle you; but my
      teeth are pretty good; you had better take your throat a little further
      off.&rsquo; He is as savage as a wild-cat.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am not surprised to hear it,&rdquo; Montanelli answered quietly. &ldquo;But I came
      to ask you a question. Do you honestly believe that the presence of
      Rivarez in the prison here constitutes a serious danger to the peace of
      the district?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Most certainly I do, Your Eminence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You think that, to prevent the risk of bloodshed, it is absolutely
      necessary that he should somehow be got rid of before Corpus Domini?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can only repeat that if he is here on Thursday, I do not expect the
      festival to pass over without a fight, and I think it likely to be a
      serious one.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you think that if he were not here there would be no such danger?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In that case, there would either be no disturbance at all, or at most a
      little shouting and stone-throwing. If Your Eminence can find some way of
      getting rid of him, I will undertake that the peace shall be kept.
      Otherwise, I expect most serious trouble. I am convinced that a new rescue
      plot is on hand, and Thursday is the day when we may expect the attempt.
      Now, if on that very morning they suddenly find that he is not in the
      fortress at all, their plan fails of itself, and they have no occasion to
      begin fighting. But if we have to repulse them, and the daggers once get
      drawn among such throngs of people, we are likely to have the place burnt
      down before nightfall.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then why do you not send him in to Ravenna?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Heaven knows, Your Eminence, I should be thankful to do it! But how am I
      to prevent the people rescuing him on the way? I have not soldiers enough
      to resist an armed attack; and all these mountaineers have got knives or
      flint-locks or some such thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You still persist, then, in wishing for a court-martial, and in asking my
      consent to it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pardon me, Your Eminence; I ask you only one thing&mdash;to help me
      prevent riots and bloodshed. I am quite willing to admit that the military
      commissions, such as that of Colonel Freddi, were sometimes unnecessarily
      severe, and irritated instead of subduing the people; but I think that in
      this case a court-martial would be a wise measure and in the long run a
      merciful one. It would prevent a riot, which in itself would be a terrible
      disaster, and which very likely might cause a return of the military
      commissions His Holiness has abolished.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Governor finished his little speech with much solemnity, and waited
      for the Cardinal&rsquo;s answer. It was a long time coming; and when it came was
      startlingly unexpected.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Colonel Ferrari, do you believe in God?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your Eminence!&rdquo; the colonel gasped in a voice full of exclamation-stops.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you believe in God?&rdquo; Montanelli repeated, rising and looking down at
      him with steady, searching eyes. The colonel rose too.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your Eminence, I am a Christian man, and have never yet been refused
      absolution.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli lifted the cross from his breast.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then swear on the cross of the Redeemer Who died for you, that you have
      been speaking the truth to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The colonel stood still and gazed at it blankly. He could not quite make
      up his mind which was mad, he or the Cardinal.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have asked me,&rdquo; Montanelli went on, &ldquo;to give my consent to a man&rsquo;s
      death. Kiss the cross, if you dare, and tell me that you believe there is
      no other way to prevent greater bloodshed. And remember that if you tell
      me a lie you are imperilling your immortal soul.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      After a little pause, the Governor bent down and put the cross to his
      lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believe it,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli turned slowly away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will give you a definite answer to-morrow. But first I must see Rivarez
      and speak to him alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your Eminence&mdash;if I might suggest&mdash;I am sure you will regret
      it. For that matter, he sent me a message yesterday, by the guard, asking
      to see Your Eminence; but I took no notice of it, because&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Took no notice!&rdquo; Montanelli repeated. &ldquo;A man in such circumstances sent
      you a message, and you took no notice of it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sorry if Your Eminence is displeased. I did not wish to trouble you
      over a mere impertinence like that; I know Rivarez well enough by now to
      feel sure that he only wanted to insult you. And, indeed, if you will
      allow me to say so, it would be most imprudent to go near him alone; he is
      really dangerous&mdash;so much so, in fact, that I have thought it
      necessary to use some physical restraint of a mild kind&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you really think there is much danger to be apprehended from one sick
      and unarmed man, who is under physical restraint of a mild kind?&rdquo;
       Montanelli spoke quite gently, but the colonel felt the sting of his quiet
      contempt, and flushed under it resentfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your Eminence will do as you think best,&rdquo; he said in his stiffest manner.
      &ldquo;I only wished to spare you the pain of hearing this man&rsquo;s awful
      blasphemies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Which do you think the more grievous misfortune for a Christian man; to
      hear a blasphemous word uttered, or to abandon a fellow-creature in
      extremity?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Governor stood erect and stiff, with his official face, like a face of
      wood. He was deeply offended at Montanelli&rsquo;s treatment of him, and showed
      it by unusual ceremoniousness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At what time does Your Eminence wish to visit the prisoner?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will go to him at once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As Your Eminence pleases. If you will kindly wait a few moments, I will
      send someone to prepare him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Governor had come down from his official pedestal in a great hurry. He
      did not want Montanelli to see the straps.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you; I would rather see him as he is, without preparation. I will
      go straight up to the fortress. Good-evening, colonel; you may expect my
      answer to-morrow morning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0024" id="link2HCH0024">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
