<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      V
    </h2>
    <p>
      THE Gadfly certainly knew how to make personal enemies. He had arrived in
      Florence in August, and by the end of October three-fourths of the
      committee which had invited him shared Martini&rsquo;s opinion. His savage
      attacks upon Montanelli had annoyed even his admirers; and Galli himself,
      who at first had been inclined to uphold everything the witty satirist
      said or did, began to acknowledge with an aggrieved air that Montanelli
      had better have been left in peace. &ldquo;Decent cardinals are none so plenty.
      One might treat them politely when they do turn up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The only person who, apparently, remained quite indifferent to the storm
      of caricatures and pasquinades was Montanelli himself. It seemed, as
      Martini said, hardly worth while to expend one&rsquo;s energy in ridiculing a
      man who took it so good-humouredly. It was said in the town that
      Montanelli, one day when the Archbishop of Florence was dining with him,
      had found in the room one of the Gadfly&rsquo;s bitter personal lampoons against
      himself, had read it through and handed the paper to the Archbishop,
      remarking: &ldquo;That is rather cleverly put, is it not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      One day there appeared in the town a leaflet, headed: &ldquo;The Mystery of the
      Annunciation.&rdquo; Even had the author omitted his now familiar signature, a
      sketch of a gadfly with spread wings, the bitter, trenchant style would
      have left in the minds of most readers no doubt as to his identity. The
      skit was in the form of a dialogue between Tuscany as the Virgin Mary, and
      Montanelli as the angel who, bearing the lilies of purity and crowned with
      the olive branch of peace, was announcing the advent of the Jesuits. The
      whole thing was full of offensive personal allusions and hints of the most
      risky nature, and all Florence felt the satire to be both ungenerous and
      unfair. And yet all Florence laughed. There was something so irresistible
      in the Gadfly&rsquo;s grave absurdities that those who most disapproved of and
      disliked him laughed as immoderately at all his squibs as did his warmest
      partisans. Repulsive in tone as the leaflet was, it left its trace upon
      the popular feeling of the town. Montanelli&rsquo;s personal reputation stood
      too high for any lampoon, however witty, seriously to injure it, but for a
      moment the tide almost turned against him. The Gadfly had known where to
      sting; and, though eager crowds still collected before the Cardinal&rsquo;s
      house to see him enter or leave his carriage, ominous cries of &ldquo;Jesuit!&rdquo;
       and &ldquo;Sanfedist spy!&rdquo; often mingled with the cheers and benedictions.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Montanelli had no lack of supporters. Two days after the publication
      of the skit, the Churchman, a leading clerical paper, brought out a
      brilliant article, called: &ldquo;An Answer to &lsquo;The Mystery of the
      Annunciation,&rsquo;&rdquo; and signed: &ldquo;A Son of the Church.&rdquo; It was an impassioned
      defence of Montanelli against the Gadfly&rsquo;s slanderous imputations. The
      anonymous writer, after expounding, with great eloquence and fervour, the
      doctrine of peace on earth and good will towards men, of which the new
      Pontiff was the evangelist, concluded by challenging the Gadfly to prove a
      single one of his assertions, and solemnly appealing to the public not to
      believe a contemptible slanderer. Both the cogency of the article as a bit
      of special pleading and its merit as a literary composition were
      sufficiently far above the average to attract much attention in the town,
      especially as not even the editor of the newspaper could guess the
      author&rsquo;s identity. The article was soon reprinted separately in pamphlet
      form; and the &ldquo;anonymous defender&rdquo; was discussed in every coffee-shop in
      Florence.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly responded with a violent attack on the new Pontificate and all
      its supporters, especially on Montanelli, who, he cautiously hinted, had
      probably consented to the panegyric on himself. To this the anonymous
      defender again replied in the Churchman with an indignant denial. During
      the rest of Montanelli&rsquo;s stay the controversy raging between the two
      writers occupied more of the public attention than did even the famous
      preacher himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some members of the liberal party ventured to remonstrate with the Gadfly
      about the unnecessary malice of his tone towards Montanelli; but they did
      not get much satisfaction out of him. He only smiled affably and answered
      with a languid little stammer: &ldquo;R-really, gentlemen, you are rather
      unfair. I expressly stipulated, when I gave in to Signora Bolla, that I
      should be allowed a l-l-little chuckle all to myself now. It is so
      nominated in the bond!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At the end of October Montanelli returned to his see in the Romagna, and,
      before leaving Florence, preached a farewell sermon in which he spoke of
      the controversy, gently deprecating the vehemence of both writers and
      begging his unknown defender to set an example of tolerance by closing a
      useless and unseemly war of words. On the following day the Churchman
      contained a notice that, at Monsignor Montanelli&rsquo;s publicly expressed
      desire, &ldquo;A Son of the Church&rdquo; would withdraw from the controversy.
    </p>
    <p>
      The last word remained with the Gadfly. He issued a little leaflet, in
      which he declared himself disarmed and converted by Montanelli&rsquo;s Christian
      meekness and ready to weep tears of reconciliation upon the neck of the
      first Sanfedist he met. &ldquo;I am even willing,&rdquo; he concluded; &ldquo;to embrace my
      anonymous challenger himself; and if my readers knew, as his Eminence and
      I know, what that implies and why he remains anonymous, they would believe
      in the sincerity of my conversion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In the latter part of November he announced to the literary committee that
      he was going for a fortnight&rsquo;s holiday to the seaside. He went,
      apparently, to Leghorn; but Dr. Riccardo, going there soon after and
      wishing to speak to him, searched the town for him in vain. On the 5th of
      December a political demonstration of the most extreme character burst out
      in the States of the Church, along the whole chain of the Apennines; and
      people began to guess the reason of the Gadfly&rsquo;s sudden fancy to take his
      holidays in the depth of winter. He came back to Florence when the riots
      had been quelled, and, meeting Riccardo in the street, remarked affably:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hear you were inquiring for me in Leghorn; I was staying in Pisa. What
      a pretty old town it is! There&rsquo;s something quite Arcadian about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In Christmas week he attended an afternoon meeting of the literary
      committee which was held in Dr. Riccardo&rsquo;s lodgings near the Porta alla
      Croce. The meeting was a full one, and when he came in, a little late,
      with an apologetic bow and smile, there seemed to be no seat empty.
      Riccardo rose to fetch a chair from the next room, but the Gadfly stopped
      him. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t trouble about it,&rdquo; he said; &ldquo;I shall be quite comfortable
      here&rdquo;; and crossing the room to a window beside which Gemma had placed her
      chair, he sat down on the sill, leaning his head indolently back against
      the shutter.
    </p>
    <p>
      As he looked down at Gemma, smiling with half-shut eyes, in the subtle,
      sphinx-like way that gave him the look of a Leonardo da Vinci portrait,
      the instinctive distrust with which he inspired her deepened into a sense
      of unreasoning fear.
    </p>
    <p>
      The proposal under discussion was that a pamphlet be issued setting forth
      the committee&rsquo;s views on the dearth with which Tuscany was threatened and
      the measures which should be taken to meet it. The matter was a somewhat
      difficult one to decide, because, as usual, the committee&rsquo;s views upon the
      subject were much divided. The more advanced section, to which Gemma,
      Martini, and Riccardo belonged, was in favour of an energetic appeal to
      both government and public to take adequate measures at once for the
      relief of the peasantry. The moderate division&mdash;including, of course,
      Grassini&mdash;feared that an over-emphatic tone might irritate rather
      than convince the ministry.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is all very well, gentlemen, to want the people helped at once,&rdquo; he
      said, looking round upon the red-hot radicals with his calm and pitying
      air. &ldquo;We most of us want a good many things that we are not likely to get;
      but if we start with the tone you propose to adopt, the government is very
      likely not to begin any relief measures at all till there is actual
      famine. If we could only induce the ministry to make an inquiry into the
      state of the crops it would be a step in advance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Galli, in his corner by the stove, jumped up to answer his enemy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A step in advance&mdash;yes, my dear sir; but if there&rsquo;s going to be a
      famine, it won&rsquo;t wait for us to advance at that pace. The people might all
      starve before we got to any actual relief.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It would be interesting to know&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; Sacconi began; but several
      voices interrupted him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Speak up; we can&rsquo;t hear!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should think not, with such an infernal row in the street,&rdquo; said Galli,
      irritably. &ldquo;Is that window shut, Riccardo? One can&rsquo;t hear one&rsquo;s self
      speak!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gemma looked round. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;the window is quite shut. I think
      there is a variety show, or some such thing, passing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The sounds of shouting and laughter, of the tinkling of bells and
      trampling of feet, resounded from the street below, mixed with the braying
      of a villainous brass band and the unmerciful banging of a drum.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It can&rsquo;t be helped these few days,&rdquo; said Riccardo; &ldquo;we must expect noise
      at Christmas time. What were you saying, Sacconi?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said it would be interesting to hear what is thought about the matter
      in Pisa and Leghorn. Perhaps Signor Rivarez can tell us something; he has
      just come from there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly did not answer. He was staring out of the window and appeared
      not to have heard what had been said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signor Rivarez!&rdquo; said Gemma. She was the only person sitting near to him,
      and as he remained silent she bent forward and touched him on the arm. He
      slowly turned his face to her, and she started as she saw its fixed and
      awful immobility. For a moment it was like the face of a corpse; then the
      lips moved in a strange, lifeless way.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he whispered; &ldquo;a variety show.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her first instinct was to shield him from the curiosity of the others.
      Without understanding what was the matter with him, she realized that some
      frightful fancy or hallucination had seized upon him, and that, for the
      moment, he was at its mercy, body and soul. She rose quickly and, standing
      between him and the company, threw the window open as if to look out. No
      one but herself had seen his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the street a travelling circus was passing, with mountebanks on donkeys
      and harlequins in parti-coloured dresses. The crowd of holiday
      masqueraders, laughing and shoving, was exchanging jests and showers of
      paper ribbon with the clowns and flinging little bags of sugar-plums to
      the columbine, who sat in her car, tricked out in tinsel and feathers,
      with artificial curls on her forehead and an artificial smile on her
      painted lips. Behind the car came a motley string of figures&mdash;street
      Arabs, beggars, clowns turning somersaults, and costermongers hawking
      their wares. They were jostling, pelting, and applauding a figure which at
      first Gemma could not see for the pushing and swaying of the crowd. The
      next moment, however, she saw plainly what it was&mdash;a hunchback,
      dwarfish and ugly, grotesquely attired in a fool&rsquo;s dress, with paper cap
      and bells. He evidently belonged to the strolling company, and was amusing
      the crowd with hideous grimaces and contortions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is going on out there?&rdquo; asked Riccardo, approaching the window. &ldquo;You
      seem very much interested.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was a little surprised at their keeping the whole committee waiting to
      look at a strolling company of mountebanks. Gemma turned round.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is nothing interesting,&rdquo; she said; &ldquo;only a variety show; but they made
      such a noise that I thought it must be something else.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was standing with one hand upon the window-sill, and suddenly felt the
      Gadfly&rsquo;s cold fingers press the hand with a passionate clasp. &ldquo;Thank you!&rdquo;
       he whispered softly; and then, closing the window, sat down again upon the
      sill.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid,&rdquo; he said in his airy manner, &ldquo;that I have interrupted you,
      gentlemen. I was l-looking at the variety show; it is s-such a p-pretty
      sight.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sacconi was asking you a question,&rdquo; said Martini gruffly. The Gadfly&rsquo;s
      behaviour seemed to him an absurd piece of affectation, and he was annoyed
      that Gemma should have been tactless enough to follow his example. It was
      not like her.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly disclaimed all knowledge of the state of feeling in Pisa,
      explaining that he had been there &ldquo;only on a holiday.&rdquo; He then plunged at
      once into an animated discussion, first of agricultural prospects, then of
      the pamphlet question; and continued pouring out a flood of stammering
      talk till the others were quite tired. He seemed to find some feverish
      delight in the sound of his own voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the meeting ended and the members of the committee rose to go,
      Riccardo came up to Martini.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will you stop to dinner with me? Fabrizi and Sacconi have promised to
      stay.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thanks; but I was going to see Signora Bolla home.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you really afraid I can&rsquo;t get home by myself?&rdquo; she asked, rising and
      putting on her wrap. &ldquo;Of course he will stay with you, Dr. Riccardo; it&rsquo;s
      good for him to get a change. He doesn&rsquo;t go out half enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you will allow me, I will see you home,&rdquo; the Gadfly interposed; &ldquo;I am
      going in that direction.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you really are going that way&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose you won&rsquo;t have time to drop in here in the course of the
      evening, will you, Rivarez?&rdquo; asked Riccardo, as he opened the door for
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly looked back over his shoulder, laughing. &ldquo;I, my dear fellow?
      I&rsquo;m going to see the variety show!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a strange creature that is; and what an odd affection for
      mountebanks!&rdquo; said Riccardo, coming back to his visitors.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Case of a fellow-feeling, I should think,&rdquo; said Martini; &ldquo;the man&rsquo;s a
      mountebank himself, if ever I saw one.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish I could think he was only that,&rdquo; Fabrizi interposed, with a grave
      face. &ldquo;If he is a mountebank I am afraid he&rsquo;s a very dangerous one.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dangerous in what way?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I don&rsquo;t like those mysterious little pleasure trips that he is so
      fond of taking. This is the third time, you know; and I don&rsquo;t believe he
      has been in Pisa at all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose it is almost an open secret that it&rsquo;s into the mountains he
      goes,&rdquo; said Sacconi. &ldquo;He has hardly taken the trouble to deny that he is
      still in relations with the smugglers he got to know in the Savigno
      affair, and it&rsquo;s quite natural he should take advantage of their
      friendship to get his leaflets across the Papal frontier.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For my part,&rdquo; said Riccardo; &ldquo;what I wanted to talk to you about is this
      very question. It occurred to me that we could hardly do better than ask
      Rivarez to undertake the management of our own smuggling. That press at
      Pistoja is very inefficiently managed, to my thinking; and the way the
      leaflets are taken across, always rolled in those everlasting cigars, is
      more than primitive.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has answered pretty well up till now,&rdquo; said Martini contumaciously. He
      was getting wearied of hearing Galli and Riccardo always put the Gadfly
      forward as a model to copy, and inclined to think that the world had gone
      well enough before this &ldquo;lackadaisical buccaneer&rdquo; turned up to set
      everyone to rights.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has answered so far well that we have been satisfied with it for want
      of anything better; but you know there have been plenty of arrests and
      confiscations. Now I believe that if Rivarez undertook the business for
      us, there would be less of that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do you think so?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the first place, the smugglers look upon us as strangers to do
      business with, or as sheep to fleece, whereas Rivarez is their personal
      friend, very likely their leader, whom they look up to and trust. You may
      be sure every smuggler in the Apennines will do for a man who was in the
      Savigno revolt what he will not do for us. In the next place, there&rsquo;s
      hardly a man among us that knows the mountains as Rivarez does. Remember,
      he has been a fugitive among them, and knows the smugglers&rsquo; paths by
      heart. No smuggler would dare to cheat him, even if he wished to, and no
      smuggler could cheat him if he dared to try.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then is your proposal that we should ask him to take over the whole
      management of our literature on the other side of the frontier&mdash;distribution,
      addresses, hiding-places, everything&mdash;or simply that we should ask
      him to put the things across for us?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, as for addresses and hiding-places, he probably knows already all
      the ones that we have and a good many more that we have not. I don&rsquo;t
      suppose we should be able to teach him much in that line. As for
      distribution, it&rsquo;s as the others prefer, of course. The important
      question, to my mind, is the actual smuggling itself. Once the books are
      safe in Bologna, it&rsquo;s a comparatively simple matter to circulate them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For my part,&rdquo; said Martini, &ldquo;I am against the plan. In the first place,
      all this about his skilfulness is mere conjecture; we have not actually
      seen him engaged in frontier work and do not know whether he keeps his
      head in critical moments.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you needn&rsquo;t have any doubt of that!&rdquo; Riccardo put in. &ldquo;The history of
      the Savigno affair proves that he keeps his head.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And then,&rdquo; Martini went on; &ldquo;I do not feel at all inclined, from what
      little I know of Rivarez, to intrust him with all the party&rsquo;s secrets. He
      seems to me feather-brained and theatrical. To give the whole management
      of a party&rsquo;s contraband work into a man&rsquo;s hands is a serious matter.
      Fabrizi, what do you think?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If I had only such objections as yours, Martini,&rdquo; replied the professor,
      &ldquo;I should certainly waive them in the case of a man really possessing, as
      Rivarez undoubtedly does, all the qualifications Riccardo speaks of. For
      my part, I have not the slightest doubt as to either his courage, his
      honesty, or his presence of mind; and that he knows both mountains and
      mountaineers we have had ample proof. But there is another objection. I do
      not feel sure that it is only for the smuggling of pamphlets he goes into
      the mountains. I have begun to doubt whether he has not another purpose.
      This is, of course, entirely between ourselves. It is a mere suspicion. It
      seems to me just possible that he is in connexion with some one of the
      &lsquo;sects,&rsquo; and perhaps with the most dangerous of them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Which one do you mean&mdash;the &lsquo;Red Girdles&rsquo;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; the &lsquo;Occoltellatori.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The &lsquo;Knifers&rsquo;! But that is a little body of outlaws&mdash;peasants, most
      of them, with neither education nor political experience.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So were the insurgents of Savigno; but they had a few educated men as
      leaders, and this little society may have the same. And remember, it&rsquo;s
      pretty well known that most of the members of those more violent sects in
      the Romagna are survivors of the Savigno affair, who found themselves too
      weak to fight the Churchmen in open insurrection, and so have fallen back
      on assassination. Their hands are not strong enough for guns, and they
      take to knives instead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what makes you suppose Rivarez to be connected with them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t suppose, I merely suspect. In any case, I think we had better
      find out for certain before we intrust our smuggling to him. If he
      attempted to do both kinds of work at once he would injure our party most
      terribly; he would simply destroy its reputation and accomplish nothing.
      However, we will talk of that another time. I wanted to speak to you about
      the news from Rome. It is said that a commission is to be appointed to
      draw up a project for a municipal constitution.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0013" id="link2HCH0013">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
