<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      II
    </h2>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is the mistress in, Katie?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, sir; she is dressing. If you&rsquo;ll just step into the parlour she will
      be down in a few minutes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Katie ushered the visitor in with the cheerful friendliness of a true
      Devonshire girl. Martini was a special favourite of hers. He spoke
      English, like a foreigner, of course, but still quite respectably; and he
      never sat discussing politics at the top of his voice till one in the
      morning, when the mistress was tired, as some visitors had a way of doing.
      Moreover, he had come to Devonshire to help the mistress in her trouble,
      when her baby was dead and her husband dying there; and ever since that
      time the big, awkward, silent man had been to Katie as much &ldquo;one of the
      family&rdquo; as was the lazy black cat which now ensconced itself upon his
      knee. Pasht, for his part, regarded Martini as a useful piece of household
      furniture. This visitor never trod upon his tail, or puffed tobacco smoke
      into his eyes, or in any way obtruded upon his consciousness an aggressive
      biped personality. He behaved as a mere man should: provided a comfortable
      knee to lie upon and purr, and at table never forgot that to look on while
      human beings eat fish is not interesting for a cat. The friendship between
      them was of old date. Once, when Pasht was a kitten and his mistress too
      ill to think about him, he had come from England under Martini&rsquo;s care,
      tucked away in a basket. Since then, long experience had convinced him
      that this clumsy human bear was no fair-weather friend.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How snug you look, you two!&rdquo; said Gemma, coming into the room. &ldquo;One would
      think you had settled yourselves for the evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Martini carefully lifted the cat off his knee. &ldquo;I came early,&rdquo; he said,
      &ldquo;in the hope that you will give me some tea before we start. There will
      probably be a frightful crush, and Grassini won&rsquo;t give us any sensible
      supper&mdash;they never do in those fashionable houses.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come now!&rdquo; she said, laughing; &ldquo;that&rsquo;s as bad as Galli! Poor Grassini has
      quite enough sins of his own to answer for without having his wife&rsquo;s
      imperfect housekeeping visited upon his head. As for the tea, it will be
      ready in a minute. Katie has been making some Devonshire cakes specially
      for you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Katie is a good soul, isn&rsquo;t she, Pasht? By the way, so are you to have
      put on that pretty dress. I was afraid you would forget.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I promised you I would wear it, though it is rather warm for a hot
      evening like this.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It will be much cooler up at Fiesole; and nothing else ever suits you so
      well as white cashmere. I have brought you some flowers to wear with it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, those lovely cluster roses; I am so fond of them! But they had much
      better go into water. I hate to wear flowers.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now that&rsquo;s one of your superstitious fancies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, it isn&rsquo;t; only I think they must get so bored, spending all the
      evening pinned to such a dull companion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am afraid we shall all be bored to-night. The conversazione will be
      dull beyond endurance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Partly because everything Grassini touches becomes as dull as himself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now don&rsquo;t be spiteful. It is not fair when we are going to be a man&rsquo;s
      guests.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are always right, Madonna. Well then, it will be dull because half
      the interesting people are not coming.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How is that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. Out of town, or ill, or something. Anyway, there will be
      two or three ambassadors and some learned Germans, and the usual
      nondescript crowd of tourists and Russian princes and literary club
      people, and a few French officers; nobody else that I know of&mdash;except,
      of course, the new satirist, who is to be the attraction of the evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The new satirist? What, Rivarez? But I thought Grassini disapproved of
      him so strongly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; but once the man is here and is sure to be talked about, of course
      Grassini wants his house to be the first place where the new lion will be
      on show. You may be sure Rivarez has heard nothing of Grassini&rsquo;s
      disapproval. He may have guessed it, though; he&rsquo;s sharp enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I did not even know he had come.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He only arrived yesterday. Here comes the tea. No, don&rsquo;t get up; let me
      fetch the kettle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was never so happy as in this little study. Gemma&rsquo;s friendship, her
      grave unconsciousness of the charm she exercised over him, her frank and
      simple comradeship were the brightest things for him in a life that was
      none too bright; and whenever he began to feel more than usually depressed
      he would come in here after business hours and sit with her, generally in
      silence, watching her as she bent over her needlework or poured out tea.
      She never questioned him about his troubles or expressed any sympathy in
      words; but he always went away stronger and calmer, feeling, as he put it
      to himself, that he could &ldquo;trudge through another fortnight quite
      respectably.&rdquo; She possessed, without knowing it, the rare gift of
      consolation; and when, two years ago, his dearest friends had been
      betrayed in Calabria and shot down like wolves, her steady faith had been
      perhaps the thing which had saved him from despair.
    </p>
    <p>
      On Sunday mornings he sometimes came in to &ldquo;talk business,&rdquo; that
      expression standing for anything connected with the practical work of the
      Mazzinian party, of which they both were active and devoted members. She
      was quite a different creature then; keen, cool, and logical, perfectly
      accurate and perfectly neutral. Those who saw her only at her political
      work regarded her as a trained and disciplined conspirator, trustworthy,
      courageous, in every way a valuable member of the party, but somehow
      lacking in life and individuality. &ldquo;She&rsquo;s a born conspirator, worth any
      dozen of us; and she is nothing more,&rdquo; Galli had said of her. The &ldquo;Madonna
      Gemma&rdquo; whom Martini knew was very difficult to get at.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, and what is your &lsquo;new satirist&rsquo; like?&rdquo; she asked, glancing back
      over her shoulder as she opened the sideboard. &ldquo;There, Cesare, there are
      barley-sugar and candied angelica for you. I wonder, by the way, why
      revolutionary men are always so fond of sweets.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Other men are, too, only they think it beneath their dignity to confess
      it. The new satirist? Oh, the kind of man that ordinary women will rave
      over and you will dislike. A sort of professional dealer in sharp
      speeches, that goes about the world with a lackadaisical manner and a
      handsome ballet-girl dangling on to his coat-tails.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you mean that there is really a ballet-girl, or simply that you feel
      cross and want to imitate the sharp speeches?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Lord defend me! No; the ballet-girl is real enough and handsome
      enough, too, for those who like shrewish beauty. Personally, I don&rsquo;t.
      She&rsquo;s a Hungarian gipsy, or something of that kind, so Riccardo says; from
      some provincial theatre in Galicia. He seems to be rather a cool hand; he
      has been introducing the girl to people just as if she were his maiden
      aunt.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, that&rsquo;s only fair if he has taken her away from her home.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may look at things that way, dear Madonna, but society won&rsquo;t. I think
      most people will very much resent being introduced to a woman whom they
      know to be his mistress.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How can they know it unless he tells them so?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s plain enough; you&rsquo;ll see if you meet her. But I should think even he
      would not have the audacity to bring her to the Grassinis&rsquo;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They wouldn&rsquo;t receive her. Signora Grassini is not the woman to do
      unconventional things of that kind. But I wanted to hear about Signor
      Rivarez as a satirist, not as a man. Fabrizi told me he had been written
      to and had consented to come and take up the campaign against the Jesuits;
      and that is the last I have heard. There has been such a rush of work this
      week.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know that I can tell you much more. There doesn&rsquo;t seem to have
      been any difficulty over the money question, as we feared there would be.
      He&rsquo;s well off, it appears, and willing to work for nothing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Has he a private fortune, then?&rdquo; &ldquo;Apparently he has; though it seems
      rather odd&mdash;you heard that night at Fabrizi&rsquo;s about the state the
      Duprez expedition found him in. But he has got shares in mines somewhere
      out in Brazil; and then he has been immensely successful as a feuilleton
      writer in Paris and Vienna and London. He seems to have half a dozen
      languages at his finger-tips; and there&rsquo;s nothing to prevent his keeping
      up his newspaper connections from here. Slanging the Jesuits won&rsquo;t take
      all his time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s true, of course. It&rsquo;s time to start, Cesare. Yes, I will wear the
      roses. Wait just a minute.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She ran upstairs, and came back with the roses in the bosom of her dress,
      and a long scarf of black Spanish lace thrown over her head. Martini
      surveyed her with artistic approval.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You look like a queen, Madonna mia; like the great and wise Queen of
      Sheba.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What an unkind speech!&rdquo; she retorted, laughing; &ldquo;when you know how hard
      I&rsquo;ve been trying to mould myself into the image of the typical society
      lady! Who wants a conspirator to look like the Queen of Sheba? That&rsquo;s not
      the way to keep clear of spies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll never be able to personate the stupid society woman if you try for
      ever. But it doesn&rsquo;t matter, after all; you&rsquo;re too fair to look upon for
      spies to guess your opinions, even though you can&rsquo;t simper and hide behind
      your fan like Signora Grassini.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now Cesare, let that poor woman alone! There, take some more barley-sugar
      to sweeten your temper. Are you ready? Then we had better start.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Martini had been quite right in saying that the conversazione would be
      both crowded and dull. The literary men talked polite small-talk and
      looked hopelessly bored, while the &ldquo;nondescript crowd of tourists and
      Russian princes&rdquo; fluttered up and down the rooms, asking each other who
      were the various celebrities and trying to carry on intellectual
      conversation. Grassini was receiving his guests with a manner as carefully
      polished as his boots; but his cold face lighted up at the sight of Gemma.
      He did not really like her and indeed was secretly a little afraid of her;
      but he realized that without her his drawing room would lack a great
      attraction. He had risen high in his profession, and now that he was rich
      and well known his chief ambition was to make of his house a centre of
      liberal and intellectual society. He was painfully conscious that the
      insignificant, overdressed little woman whom in his youth he had made the
      mistake of marrying was not fit, with her vapid talk and faded prettiness,
      to be the mistress of a great literary salon. When he could prevail upon
      Gemma to come he always felt that the evening would be a success. Her
      quiet graciousness of manner set the guests at their ease, and her very
      presence seemed to lay the spectre of vulgarity which always, in his
      imagination, haunted the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      Signora Grassini greeted Gemma affectionately, exclaiming in a loud
      whisper: &ldquo;How charming you look to-night!&rdquo; and examining the white
      cashmere with viciously critical eyes. She hated her visitor rancourously,
      for the very things for which Martini loved her; for her quiet strength of
      character; for her grave, sincere directness; for the steady balance of
      her mind; for the very expression of her face. And when Signora Grassini
      hated a woman, she showed it by effusive tenderness. Gemma took the
      compliments and endearments for what they were worth, and troubled her
      head no more about them. What is called &ldquo;going into society&rdquo; was in her
      eyes one of the wearisome and rather unpleasant tasks which a conspirator
      who wishes not to attract the notice of spies must conscientiously fulfil.
      She classed it together with the laborious work of writing in cipher; and,
      knowing how valuable a practical safeguard against suspicion is the
      reputation of being a well-dressed woman, studied the fashion-plates as
      carefully as she did the keys of her ciphers.
    </p>
    <p>
      The bored and melancholy literary lions brightened up a little at the
      sound of Gemma&rsquo;s name; she was very popular among them; and the radical
      journalists, especially, gravitated at once to her end of the long room.
      But she was far too practised a conspirator to let them monopolize her.
      Radicals could be had any day; and now, when they came crowding round her,
      she gently sent them about their business, reminding them with a smile
      that they need not waste their time on converting her when there were so
      many tourists in need of instruction. For her part, she devoted herself to
      an English M.P. whose sympathies the republican party was anxious to
      gain; and, knowing him to be a specialist on finance, she first won his
      attention by asking his opinion on a technical point concerning the
      Austrian currency, and then deftly turned the conversation to the
      condition of the Lombardo-Venetian revenue. The Englishman, who had
      expected to be bored with small-talk, looked askance at her, evidently
      fearing that he had fallen into the clutches of a blue-stocking; but
      finding that she was both pleasant to look at and interesting to talk to,
      surrendered completely and plunged into as grave a discussion of Italian
      finance as if she had been Metternich. When Grassini brought up a
      Frenchman &ldquo;who wishes to ask Signora Bolla something about the history of
      Young Italy,&rdquo; the M. P. rose with a bewildered sense that perhaps there
      was more ground for Italian discontent than he had supposed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Later in the evening Gemma slipped out on to the terrace under the
      drawing-room windows to sit alone for a few moments among the great
      camellias and oleanders. The close air and continually shifting crowd in
      the rooms were beginning to give her a headache. At the further end of the
      terrace stood a row of palms and tree-ferns, planted in large tubs which
      were hidden by a bank of lilies and other flowering plants. The whole
      formed a complete screen, behind which was a little nook commanding a
      beautiful view out across the valley. The branches of a pomegranate tree,
      clustered with late blossoms, hung beside the narrow opening between the
      plants.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this nook Gemma took refuge, hoping that no one would guess her
      whereabouts until she had secured herself against the threatening headache
      by a little rest and silence. The night was warm and beautifully still;
      but coming out from the hot, close rooms she felt it cool, and drew her
      lace scarf about her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently the sounds of voices and footsteps approaching along the terrace
      roused her from the dreamy state into which she had fallen. She drew back
      into the shadow, hoping to escape notice and get a few more precious
      minutes of silence before again having to rack her tired brain for
      conversation. To her great annoyance the footsteps paused near to the
      screen; then Signora Grassini&rsquo;s thin, piping little voice broke off for a
      moment in its stream of chatter.
    </p>
    <p>
      The other voice, a man&rsquo;s, was remarkably soft and musical; but its
      sweetness of tone was marred by a peculiar, purring drawl, perhaps mere
      affectation, more probably the result of a habitual effort to conquer some
      impediment of speech, but in any case very unpleasant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;English, did you say?&rdquo; it asked. &ldquo;But surely the name is quite Italian.
      What was it&mdash;Bolla?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; she is the widow of poor Giovanni Bolla, who died in England about
      four years ago,&mdash;don&rsquo;t you remember? Ah, I forgot&mdash;you lead such
      a wandering life; we can&rsquo;t expect you to know of all our unhappy country&rsquo;s
      martyrs&mdash;they are so many!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Signora Grassini sighed. She always talked in this style to strangers; the
      role of a patriotic mourner for the sorrows of Italy formed an effective
      combination with her boarding-school manner and pretty infantine pout.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Died in England!&rdquo; repeated the other voice. &ldquo;Was he a refugee, then? I
      seem to recognize the name, somehow; was he not connected with Young Italy
      in its early days?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; he was one of the unfortunate young men who were arrested in &lsquo;33&mdash;you
      remember that sad affair? He was released in a few months; then, two or
      three years later, when there was a warrant out against him again, he
      escaped to England. The next we heard was that he was married there. It
      was a most romantic affair altogether, but poor Bolla always was
      romantic.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And then he died in England, you say?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, of consumption; he could not stand that terrible English climate.
      And she lost her only child just before his death; it caught scarlet
      fever. Very sad, is it not? And we are all so fond of dear Gemma! She is a
      little stiff, poor thing; the English always are, you know; but I think
      her troubles have made her melancholy, and&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gemma stood up and pushed back the boughs of the pomegranate tree. This
      retailing of her private sorrows for purposes of small-talk was almost
      unbearable to her, and there was visible annoyance in her face as she
      stepped into the light.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah! here she is!&rdquo; exclaimed the hostess, with admirable coolness. &ldquo;Gemma,
      dear, I was wondering where you could have disappeared to. Signor Felice
      Rivarez wishes to make your acquaintance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So it&rsquo;s the Gadfly,&rdquo; thought Gemma, looking at him with some curiosity.
      He bowed to her decorously enough, but his eyes glanced over her face and
      figure with a look which seemed to her insolently keen and inquisitorial.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have found a d-d-delightful little nook here,&rdquo; he remarked, looking
      at the thick screen; &ldquo;and w-w-what a charming view!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; it&rsquo;s a pretty corner. I came out here to get some air.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It seems almost ungrateful to the good God to stay indoors on such a
      lovely night,&rdquo; said the hostess, raising her eyes to the stars. (She had
      good eyelashes and liked to show them.) &ldquo;Look, signore! Would not our
      sweet Italy be heaven on earth if only she were free? To think that she
      should be a bond-slave, with such flowers and such skies!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And such patriotic women!&rdquo; the Gadfly murmured in his soft, languid
      drawl.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gemma glanced round at him in some trepidation; his impudence was too
      glaring, surely, to deceive anyone. But she had underrated Signora
      Grassini&rsquo;s appetite for compliments; the poor woman cast down her lashes
      with a sigh.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, signore, it is so little that a woman can do! Perhaps some day I may
      prove my right to the name of an Italian&mdash;who knows? And now I must
      go back to my social duties; the French ambassador has begged me to
      introduce his ward to all the notabilities; you must come in presently and
      see her. She is a most charming girl. Gemma, dear, I brought Signor
      Rivarez out to show him our beautiful view; I must leave him under your
      care. I know you will look after him and introduce him to everyone. Ah!
      there is that delightful Russian prince! Have you met him? They say he is
      a great favourite of the Emperor Nicholas. He is military commander of
      some Polish town with a name that nobody can pronounce. Quelle nuit
      magnifique! N&rsquo;est-ce-pas, mon prince?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She fluttered away, chattering volubly to a bull-necked man with a heavy
      jaw and a coat glittering with orders; and her plaintive dirges for &ldquo;notre
      malheureuse patrie,&rdquo; interpolated with &ldquo;charmant&rdquo; and &ldquo;mon prince,&rdquo; died
      away along the terrace.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gemma stood quite still beside the pomegranate tree. She was sorry for the
      poor, silly little woman, and annoyed at the Gadfly&rsquo;s languid insolence.
      He was watching the retreating figures with an expression of face that
      angered her; it seemed ungenerous to mock at such pitiable creatures.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There go Italian and&mdash;Russian patriotism,&rdquo; he said, turning to her
      with a smile; &ldquo;arm in arm and mightily pleased with each other&rsquo;s company.
      Which do you prefer?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She frowned slightly and made no answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of c-course,&rdquo; he went on; &ldquo;it&rsquo;s all a question of p-personal taste; but I
      think, of the two, I like the Russian variety best&mdash;it&rsquo;s so thorough.
      If Russia had to depend on flowers and skies for her supremacy instead of
      on powder and shot, how long do you think &lsquo;mon prince&rsquo; would k-keep that
      Polish fortress?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think,&rdquo; she answered coldly, &ldquo;that we can hold our personal opinions
      without ridiculing a woman whose guests we are.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, yes! I f-forgot the obligations of hospitality here in Italy; they
      are a wonderfully hospitable people, these Italians. I&rsquo;m sure the
      Austrians find them so. Won&rsquo;t you sit down?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He limped across the terrace to fetch a chair for her, and placed himself
      opposite to her, leaning against the balustrade. The light from a window
      was shining full on his face; and she was able to study it at her leisure.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was disappointed. She had expected to see a striking and powerful, if
      not pleasant face; but the most salient points of his appearance were a
      tendency to foppishness in dress and rather more than a tendency to a
      certain veiled insolence of expression and manner. For the rest, he was as
      swarthy as a mulatto, and, notwithstanding his lameness, as agile as a
      cat. His whole personality was oddly suggestive of a black jaguar. The
      forehead and left cheek were terribly disfigured by the long crooked scar
      of the old sabre-cut; and she had already noticed that, when he began to
      stammer in speaking, that side of his face was affected with a nervous
      twitch. But for these defects he would have been, in a certain restless
      and uncomfortable way, rather handsome; but it was not an attractive face.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently he began again in his soft, murmuring purr (&ldquo;Just the voice a
      jaguar would talk in, if it could speak and were in a good humour,&rdquo; Gemma
      said to herself with rising irritation).
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hear,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;that you are interested in the radical press, and
      write for the papers.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I write a little; I have not time to do much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, of course! I understood from Signora Grassini that you undertake
      other important work as well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gemma raised her eyebrows slightly. Signora Grassini, like the silly
      little woman she was, had evidently been chattering imprudently to this
      slippery creature, whom Gemma, for her part, was beginning actually to
      dislike.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My time is a good deal taken up,&rdquo; she said rather stiffly; &ldquo;but Signora
      Grassini overrates the importance of my occupations. They are mostly of a
      very trivial character.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, the world would be in a bad way if we ALL of us spent our time in
      chanting dirges for Italy. I should think the neighbourhood of our host of
      this evening and his wife would make anybody frivolous, in self-defence.
      Oh, yes, I know what you&rsquo;re going to say; you are perfectly right, but
      they are both so deliciously funny with their patriotism.&mdash;Are you
      going in already? It is so nice out here!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think I will go in now. Is that my scarf? Thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He had picked it up, and now stood looking at her with wide eyes as blue
      and innocent as forget-me-nots in a brook.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know you are offended with me,&rdquo; he said penitently, &ldquo;for fooling that
      painted-up wax doll; but what can a fellow do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Since you ask me, I do think it an ungenerous and&mdash;well&mdash;cowardly
      thing to hold one&rsquo;s intellectual inferiors up to ridicule in that way; it
      is like laughing at a cripple, or&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He caught his breath suddenly, painfully; and shrank back, glancing at his
      lame foot and mutilated hand. In another instant he recovered his
      self-possession and burst out laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s hardly a fair comparison, signora; we cripples don&rsquo;t flaunt our
      deformities in people&rsquo;s faces as she does her stupidity. At least give us
      credit for recognizing that crooked backs are no pleasanter than crooked
      ways. There is a step here; will you take my arm?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She re-entered the house in embarrassed silence; his unexpected
      sensitiveness had completely disconcerted her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Directly he opened the door of the great reception room she realized that
      something unusual had happened in her absence. Most of the gentlemen
      looked both angry and uncomfortable; the ladies, with hot cheeks and
      carefully feigned unconsciousness, were all collected at one end of the
      room; the host was fingering his eye-glasses with suppressed but
      unmistakable fury, and a little group of tourists stood in a corner
      casting amused glances at the further end of the room. Evidently something
      was going on there which appeared to them in the light of a joke, and to
      most of the guests in that of an insult. Signora Grassini alone did not
      appear to have noticed anything; she was fluttering her fan coquettishly
      and chattering to the secretary of the Dutch embassy, who listened with a
      broad grin on his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gemma paused an instant in the doorway, turning to see if the Gadfly, too,
      had noticed the disturbed appearance of the company. There was no
      mistaking the malicious triumph in his eyes as he glanced from the face of
      the blissfully unconscious hostess to a sofa at the end of the room. She
      understood at once; he had brought his mistress here under some false
      colour, which had deceived no one but Signora Grassini.
    </p>
    <p>
      The gipsy-girl was leaning back on the sofa, surrounded by a group of
      simpering dandies and blandly ironical cavalry officers. She was
      gorgeously dressed in amber and scarlet, with an Oriental brilliancy of
      tint and profusion of ornament as startling in a Florentine literary salon
      as if she had been some tropical bird among sparrows and starlings. She
      herself seemed to feel out of place, and looked at the offended ladies
      with a fiercely contemptuous scowl. Catching sight of the Gadfly as he
      crossed the room with Gemma, she sprang up and came towards him, with a
      voluble flood of painfully incorrect French.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;M. Rivarez, I have been looking for you everywhere! Count Saltykov wants
      to know whether you can go to his villa to-morrow night. There will be
      dancing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sorry I can&rsquo;t go; but then I couldn&rsquo;t dance if I did. Signora Bolla,
      allow me to introduce to you Mme. Zita Reni.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The gipsy glanced round at Gemma with a half defiant air and bowed
      stiffly. She was certainly handsome enough, as Martini had said, with a
      vivid, animal, unintelligent beauty; and the perfect harmony and freedom
      of her movements were delightful to see; but her forehead was low and
      narrow, and the line of her delicate nostrils was unsympathetic, almost
      cruel. The sense of oppression which Gemma had felt in the Gadfly&rsquo;s
      society was intensified by the gypsy&rsquo;s presence; and when, a moment later,
      the host came up to beg Signora Bolla to help him entertain some tourists
      in the other room, she consented with an odd feeling of relief.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Madonna, and what do you think of the Gadfly?&rdquo; Martini asked as
      they drove back to Florence late at night. &ldquo;Did you ever see anything
      quite so shameless as the way he fooled that poor little Grassini woman?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About the ballet-girl, you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, he persuaded her the girl was going to be the lion of the season.
      Signora Grassini would do anything for a celebrity.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought it an unfair and unkind thing to do; it put the Grassinis into
      a false position; and it was nothing less than cruel to the girl herself.
      I am sure she felt ill at ease.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You had a talk with him, didn&rsquo;t you? What did you think of him?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cesare, I didn&rsquo;t think anything except how glad I was to see the last
      of him. I never met anyone so fearfully tiring. He gave me a headache in
      ten minutes. He is like an incarnate demon of unrest.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought you wouldn&rsquo;t like him; and, to tell the truth, no more do I.
      The man&rsquo;s as slippery as an eel; I don&rsquo;t trust him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0010" id="link2HCH0010">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
