<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      IV
    </h2>
    <p>
      MONSIGNOR MONTANELLI arrived in Florence in the first week of October. His
      visit caused a little flutter of excitement throughout the town. He was a
      famous preacher and a representative of the reformed Papacy; and people
      looked eagerly to him for an exposition of the &ldquo;new doctrine,&rdquo; the gospel
      of love and reconciliation which was to cure the sorrows of Italy. The
      nomination of Cardinal Gizzi to the Roman State Secretaryship in place of
      the universally detested Lambruschini had raised the public enthusiasm to
      its highest pitch; and Montanelli was just the man who could most easily
      sustain it. The irreproachable strictness of his life was a phenomenon
      sufficiently rare among the high dignitaries of the Roman Church to
      attract the attention of people accustomed to regard blackmailing,
      peculation, and disreputable intrigues as almost invariable adjuncts to
      the career of a prelate. Moreover, his talent as a preacher was really
      great; and with his beautiful voice and magnetic personality, he would in
      any time and place have made his mark.
    </p>
    <p>
      Grassini, as usual, strained every nerve to get the newly arrived
      celebrity to his house; but Montanelli was no easy game to catch. To all
      invitations he replied with the same courteous but positive refusal,
      saying that his health was bad and his time fully occupied, and that he
      had neither strength nor leisure for going into society.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What omnivorous creatures those Grassinis are!&rdquo; Martini said
      contemptuously to Gemma as they crossed the Signoria square one bright,
      cold Sunday morning. &ldquo;Did you notice the way Grassini bowed when the
      Cardinal&rsquo;s carriage drove up? It&rsquo;s all one to them who a man is, so long
      as he&rsquo;s talked about. I never saw such lion-hunters in my life. Only last
      August it was the Gadfly; now it&rsquo;s Montanelli. I hope His Eminence feels
      flattered at the attention; a precious lot of adventurers have shared it
      with him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They had been hearing Montanelli preach in the Cathedral; and the great
      building had been so thronged with eager listeners that Martini, fearing a
      return of Gemma&rsquo;s troublesome headaches, had persuaded her to come away
      before the Mass was over. The sunny morning, the first after a week of
      rain, offered him an excuse for suggesting a walk among the garden slopes
      by San Niccolo.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she answered; &ldquo;I should like a walk if you have time; but not to the
      hills. Let us keep along the Lung&rsquo;Arno; Montanelli will pass on his way
      back from church and I am like Grassini&mdash;I want to see the
      notability.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you have just seen him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not close. There was such a crush in the Cathedral, and his back was
      turned to us when the carriage passed. If we keep near to the bridge we
      shall be sure to see him well&mdash;he is staying on the Lung&rsquo;Arno, you
      know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what has given you such a sudden fancy to see Montanelli? You never
      used to care about famous preachers.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is not famous preachers; it is the man himself; I want to see how much
      he has changed since I saw him last.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When was that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Two days after Arthur&rsquo;s death.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Martini glanced at her anxiously. They had come out on to the Lung&rsquo;Arno,
      and she was staring absently across the water, with a look on her face
      that he hated to see.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gemma, dear,&rdquo; he said after a moment; &ldquo;are you going to let that
      miserable business haunt you all your life? We have all made mistakes when
      we were seventeen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We have not all killed our dearest friend when we were seventeen,&rdquo; she
      answered wearily; and, leaning her arm on the stone balustrade of the
      bridge, looked down into the river. Martini held his tongue; he was almost
      afraid to speak to her when this mood was on her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I never look down at water without remembering,&rdquo; she said, slowly raising
      her eyes to his; then with a nervous little shiver: &ldquo;Let us walk on a bit,
      Cesare; it is chilly for standing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They crossed the bridge in silence and walked on along the river-side.
      After a few minutes she spoke again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a beautiful voice that man has! There is something about it that I
      have never heard in any other human voice. I believe it is the secret of
      half his influence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is a wonderful voice,&rdquo; Martini assented, catching at a subject of
      conversation which might lead her away from the dreadful memory called up
      by the river, &ldquo;and he is, apart from his voice, about the finest preacher
      I have ever heard. But I believe the secret of his influence lies deeper
      than that. It is the way his life stands out from that of almost all the
      other prelates. I don&rsquo;t know whether you could lay your hand on one other
      high dignitary in all the Italian Church&mdash;except the Pope himself&mdash;whose
      reputation is so utterly spotless. I remember, when I was in the Romagna
      last year, passing through his diocese and seeing those fierce
      mountaineers waiting in the rain to get a glimpse of him or touch his
      dress. He is venerated there almost as a saint; and that means a good deal
      among the Romagnols, who generally hate everything that wears a cassock. I
      remarked to one of the old peasants,&mdash;as typical a smuggler as ever I
      saw in my life,&mdash;that the people seemed very much devoted to their
      bishop, and he said: &lsquo;We don&rsquo;t love bishops, they are liars; we love
      Monsignor Montanelli. Nobody has ever known him to tell a lie or do an
      unjust thing.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wonder,&rdquo; Gemma said, half to herself, &ldquo;if he knows the people think
      that about him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t he know it? Do you think it is not true?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know it is not true.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you know it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because he told me so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;HE told you? Montanelli? Gemma, what do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She pushed the hair back from her forehead and turned towards him. They
      were standing still again, he leaning on the balustrade and she slowly
      drawing lines on the pavement with the point of her umbrella.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cesare, you and I have been friends for all these years, and I have never
      told you what really happened about Arthur.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is no need to tell me, dear,&rdquo; he broke in hastily; &ldquo;I know all
      about it already.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Giovanni told you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, when he was dying. He told me about it one night when I was sitting
      up with him. He said&mdash;&mdash; Gemma, dear, I had better tell you the
      truth, now we have begun talking about it&mdash;he said that you were
      always brooding over that wretched story, and he begged me to be as good a
      friend to you as I could and try to keep you from thinking of it. And I
      have tried to, dear, though I may not have succeeded&mdash;I have,
      indeed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know you have,&rdquo; she answered softly, raising her eyes for a moment; &ldquo;I
      should have been badly off without your friendship. But&mdash;Giovanni did
      not tell you about Monsignor Montanelli, then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I didn&rsquo;t know that he had anything to do with it. What he told me was
      about&mdash;all that affair with the spy, and about&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About my striking Arthur and his drowning himself. Well, I will tell you
      about Montanelli.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They turned back towards the bridge over which the Cardinal&rsquo;s carriage
      would have to pass. Gemma looked out steadily across the water as she
      spoke.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In those days Montanelli was a canon; he was Director of the Theological
      Seminary at Pisa, and used to give Arthur lessons in philosophy and read
      with him after he went up to the Sapienza. They were perfectly devoted to
      each other; more like two lovers than teacher and pupil. Arthur almost
      worshipped the ground that Montanelli walked on, and I remember his once
      telling me that if he lost his &lsquo;Padre&rsquo;&mdash;he always used to call
      Montanelli so&mdash;he should go and drown himself. Well, then you know
      what happened about the spy. The next day, my father and the Burtons&mdash;Arthur&rsquo;s
      step-brothers, most detestable people&mdash;spent the whole day dragging
      the Darsena basin for the body; and I sat in my room alone and thought of
      what I had done&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She paused a moment, and went on again:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Late in the evening my father came into my room and said: &lsquo;Gemma, child,
      come downstairs; there&rsquo;s a man I want you to see.&rsquo; And when we went down
      there was one of the students belonging to the group sitting in the
      consulting room, all white and shaking; and he told us about Giovanni&rsquo;s
      second letter coming from the prison to say that they had heard from the
      jailer about Cardi, and that Arthur had been tricked in the confessional.
      I remember the student saying to me: &lsquo;It is at least some consolation that
      we know he was innocent&rsquo; My father held my hands and tried to comfort me;
      he did not know then about the blow. Then I went back to my room and sat
      there all night alone. In the morning my father went out again with the
      Burtons to see the harbour dragged. They had some hope of finding the body
      there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was never found, was it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; it must have got washed out to sea; but they thought there was a
      chance. I was alone in my room and the servant came up to say that a
      &lsquo;reverendissimo padre&rsquo; had called and she had told him my father was at
      the docks and he had gone away. I knew it must be Montanelli; so I ran out
      at the back door and caught him up at the garden gate. When I said: &lsquo;Canon
      Montanelli, I want to speak to you,&rsquo; he just stopped and waited silently
      for me to speak. Oh, Cesare, if you had seen his face&mdash;it haunted me
      for months afterwards! I said: &lsquo;I am Dr. Warren&rsquo;s daughter, and I have
      come to tell you that it is I who have killed Arthur.&rsquo; I told him
      everything, and he stood and listened, like a figure cut in stone, till I
      had finished; then he said: &lsquo;Set your heart at rest, my child; it is I
      that am a murderer, not you. I deceived him and he found it out.&rsquo; And with
      that he turned and went out at the gate without another word.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what happened to him after that; I heard the same evening
      that he had fallen down in the street in a kind of fit and had been
      carried into a house near the docks; but that is all I know. My father did
      everything he could for me; when I told him about it he threw up his
      practice and took me away to England at once, so that I should never hear
      anything that could remind me. He was afraid I should end in the water,
      too; and indeed I believe I was near it at one time. But then, you know,
      when we found out that my father had cancer I was obliged to come to
      myself&mdash;there was no one else to nurse him. And after he died I was
      left with the little ones on my hands until my elder brother was able to
      give them a home. Then there was Giovanni. Do you know, when he came to
      England we were almost afraid to meet each other with that frightful
      memory between us. He was so bitterly remorseful for his share in it all&mdash;that
      unhappy letter he wrote from prison. But I believe, really, it was our
      common trouble that drew us together.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Martini smiled and shook his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It may have been so on your side,&rdquo; he said; &ldquo;but Giovanni had made up his
      mind from the first time he ever saw you. I remember his coming back to
      Milan after that first visit to Leghorn and raving about you to me till I
      was perfectly sick of hearing of the English Gemma. I thought I should
      hate you. Ah! there it comes!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The carriage crossed the bridge and drove up to a large house on the
      Lung&rsquo;Arno. Montanelli was leaning back on the cushions as if too tired to
      care any longer for the enthusiastic crowd which had collected round the
      door to catch a glimpse of him. The inspired look that his face had worn
      in the Cathedral had faded quite away and the sunlight showed the lines of
      care and fatigue. When he had alighted and passed, with the heavy,
      spiritless tread of weary and heart-sick old age, into the house, Gemma
      turned away and walked slowly to the bridge. Her face seemed for a moment
      to reflect the withered, hopeless look of his. Martini walked beside her
      in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have so often wondered,&rdquo; she began again after a little pause; &ldquo;what he
      meant about the deception. It has sometimes occurred to me&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, it is very strange; there was the most extraordinary personal
      resemblance between them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Between whom?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Arthur and Montanelli. It was not only I who noticed it. And there was
      something mysterious in the relationship between the members of that
      household. Mrs. Burton, Arthur&rsquo;s mother, was one of the sweetest women I
      ever knew. Her face had the same spiritual look as Arthur&rsquo;s, and I believe
      they were alike in character, too. But she always seemed half frightened,
      like a detected criminal; and her step-son&rsquo;s wife used to treat her as no
      decent person treats a dog. And then Arthur himself was such a startling
      contrast to all those vulgar Burtons. Of course, when one is a child one
      takes everything for granted; but looking back on it afterwards I have
      often wondered whether Arthur was really a Burton.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Possibly he found out something about his mother&mdash;that may easily
      have been the cause of his death, not the Cardi affair at all,&rdquo; Martini
      interposed, offering the only consolation he could think of at the moment.
      Gemma shook her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you could have seen his face after I struck him, Cesare, you would not
      think that. It may be all true about Montanelli&mdash;very likely it is&mdash;but
      what I have done I have done.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They walked on a little way without speaking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear,&rdquo; Martini said at last; &ldquo;if there were any way on earth to undo a
      thing that is once done, it would be worth while to brood over our old
      mistakes; but as it is, let the dead bury their dead. It is a terrible
      story, but at least the poor lad is out of it now, and luckier than some
      of those that are left&mdash;the ones that are in exile and in prison. You
      and I have them to think of, we have no right to eat out our hearts for
      the dead. Remember what your own Shelley says: &lsquo;The past is Death&rsquo;s, the
      future is thine own.&rsquo; Take it, while it is still yours, and fix your mind,
      not on what you may have done long ago to hurt, but on what you can do now
      to help.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In his earnestness he had taken her hand. He dropped it suddenly and drew
      back at the sound of a soft, cold, drawling voice behind him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Monsignor Montan-n-nelli,&rdquo; murmured this languid voice, &ldquo;is undoubtedly
      all you say, my dear doctor. In fact, he appears to be so much too good
      for this world that he ought to be politely escorted into the next. I am
      sure he would cause as great a sensation there as he has done here; there
      are p-p-probably many old-established ghosts who have never seen such a
      thing as an honest cardinal. And there is nothing that ghosts love as they
      do novelties&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you know that?&rdquo; asked Dr. Riccardo&rsquo;s voice in a tone of
      ill-suppressed irritation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;From Holy Writ, my dear sir. If the Gospel is to be trusted, even the
      most respectable of all Ghosts had a f-f-fancy for capricious alliances.
      Now, honesty and c-c-cardinals&mdash;that seems to me a somewhat
      capricious alliance, and rather an uncomfortable one, like shrimps and
      liquorice. Ah, Signor Martini, and Signora Bolla! Lovely weather after the
      rain, is it not? Have you been to hear the n-new Savonarola, too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Martini turned round sharply. The Gadfly, with a cigar in his mouth and a
      hot-house flower in his buttonhole, was holding out to him a slender,
      carefully-gloved hand. With the sunlight reflected in his immaculate boots
      and glancing back from the water on to his smiling face, he looked to
      Martini less lame and more conceited than usual. They were shaking hands,
      affably on the one side and rather sulkily on the other, when Riccardo
      hastily exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am afraid Signora Bolla is not well!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was so pale that her face looked almost livid under the shadow of her
      bonnet, and the ribbon at her throat fluttered perceptibly from the
      violent beating of the heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will go home,&rdquo; she said faintly.
    </p>
    <p>
      A cab was called and Martini got in with her to see her safely home. As
      the Gadfly bent down to arrange her cloak, which was hanging over the
      wheel, he raised his eyes suddenly to her face, and Martini saw that she
      shrank away with a look of something like terror.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gemma, what is the matter with you?&rdquo; he asked, in English, when they had
      started. &ldquo;What did that scoundrel say to you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing, Cesare; it was no fault of his. I&mdash;I&mdash;had a fright&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A fright?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; I fancied&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; She put one hand over her eyes, and he
      waited silently till she should recover her self-command. Her face was
      already regaining its natural colour.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are quite right,&rdquo; she said at last, turning to him and speaking in
      her usual voice; &ldquo;it is worse than useless to look back at a horrible
      past. It plays tricks with one&rsquo;s nerves and makes one imagine all sorts of
      impossible things. We will NEVER talk about that subject again, Cesare, or
      I shall see fantastic likenesses to Arthur in every face I meet. It is a
      kind of hallucination, like a nightmare in broad daylight. Just now, when
      that odious little fop came up, I fancied it was Arthur.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0012" id="link2HCH0012">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
