<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
   <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      VII
    </h2>
    <p>
      IT had long been dark when Arthur rang at the front door of the great
      house in the Via Borra. He remembered that he had been wandering about the
      streets; but where, or why, or for how long, he had no idea. Julia&rsquo;s page
      opened the door, yawning, and grinned significantly at the haggard, stony
      face. It seemed to him a prodigious joke to have the young master come
      home from jail like a &ldquo;drunk and disorderly&rdquo; beggar. Arthur went upstairs.
      On the first floor he met Gibbons coming down with an air of lofty and
      solemn disapproval. He tried to pass with a muttered &ldquo;Good evening&rdquo;; but
      Gibbons was no easy person to get past against his will.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The gentlemen are out, sir,&rdquo; he said, looking critically at Arthur&rsquo;s
      rather neglected dress and hair. &ldquo;They have gone with the mistress to an
      evening party, and will not be back till nearly twelve.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur looked at his watch; it was nine o&rsquo;clock. Oh, yes! he would have
      time&mdash;plenty of time&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My mistress desired me to ask whether you would like any supper, sir; and
      to say that she hopes you will sit up for her, as she particularly wishes
      to speak to you this evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want anything, thank you; you can tell her I have not gone to
      bed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went up to his room. Nothing in it had been changed since his arrest;
      Montanelli&rsquo;s portrait was on the table where he had placed it, and the
      crucifix stood in the alcove as before. He paused a moment on the
      threshold, listening; but the house was quite still; evidently no one was
      coming to disturb him. He stepped softly into the room and locked the
      door.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so he had come to the end. There was nothing to think or trouble
      about; an importunate and useless consciousness to get rid of&mdash;and
      nothing more. It seemed a stupid, aimless kind of thing, somehow.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had not formed any resolve to commit suicide, nor indeed had he thought
      much about it; the thing was quite obvious and inevitable. He had even no
      definite idea as to what manner of death to choose; all that mattered was
      to be done with it quickly&mdash;to have it over and forget. He had no
      weapon in the room, not even a pocketknife; but that was of no consequence&mdash;a
      towel would do, or a sheet torn into strips.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a large nail just over the window. That would do; but it must be
      firm to bear his weight. He got up on a chair to feel the nail; it was not
      quite firm, and he stepped down again and took a hammer from a drawer. He
      knocked in the nail, and was about to pull a sheet off his bed, when he
      suddenly remembered that he had not said his prayers. Of course, one must
      pray before dying; every Christian does that. There are even special
      prayers for a departing soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      He went into the alcove and knelt down before the crucifix. &ldquo;Almighty and
      merciful God&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; he began aloud; and with that broke off and
      said no more. Indeed, the world was grown so dull that there was nothing
      left to pray for&mdash;or against. And then, what did Christ know about a
      trouble of this kind&mdash;Christ, who had never suffered it? He had only
      been betrayed, like Bolla; He had never been tricked into betraying.
    </p>
    <p>
      Arthur rose, crossing himself from old habit. Approaching the table, he
      saw lying upon it a letter addressed to him, in Montanelli&rsquo;s handwriting.
      It was in pencil:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My Dear Boy: It is a great disappointment to me that I cannot see you on
      the day of your release; but I have been sent for to visit a dying man. I
      shall not get back till late at night. Come to me early to-morrow morning.
      In great haste,
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;L. M.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He put down the letter with a sigh; it did seem hard on the Padre.
    </p>
    <p>
      How the people had laughed and gossiped in the streets! Nothing was
      altered since the days when he had been alive. Not the least little one of
      all the daily trifles round him was changed because a human soul, a living
      human soul, had been struck down dead. It was all just the same as before.
      The water had plashed in the fountains; the sparrows had twittered under
      the eaves; just as they had done yesterday, just as they would do
      to-morrow. And as for him, he was dead&mdash;quite dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      He sat down on the edge of the bed, crossed his arms along the foot-rail,
      and rested his forehead upon them. There was plenty of time; and his head
      ached so&mdash;the very middle of the brain seemed to ache; it was all so
      dull and stupid&mdash;so utterly meaningless&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      The front-door bell rang sharply, and he started up in a breathless agony
      of terror, with both hands at his throat. They had come back&mdash;he had
      sat there dreaming, and let the precious time slip away&mdash;and now he
      must see their faces and hear their cruel tongues&mdash;their sneers and
      comments&mdash;If only he had a knife&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      He looked desperately round the room. His mother&rsquo;s work-basket stood in a
      little cupboard; surely there would be scissors; he might sever an artery.
      No; the sheet and nail were safer, if he had time.
    </p>
    <p>
      He dragged the counterpane from his bed, and with frantic haste began
      tearing off a strip. The sound of footsteps came up the stairs. No; the
      strip was too wide; it would not tie firmly; and there must be a noose. He
      worked faster as the footsteps drew nearer; and the blood throbbed in his
      temples and roared in his ears. Quicker&mdash;quicker! Oh, God! five
      minutes more!
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a knock at the door. The strip of torn stuff dropped from his
      hands, and he sat quite still, holding his breath to listen. The handle of
      the door was tried; then Julia&rsquo;s voice called:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Arthur!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stood up, panting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Arthur, open the door, please; we are waiting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He gathered up the torn counterpane, threw it into a drawer, and hastily
      smoothed down the bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Arthur!&rdquo; This time it was James who called, and the door-handle was
      shaken impatiently. &ldquo;Are you asleep?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur looked round the room, saw that everything was hidden, and unlocked
      the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should think you might at least have obeyed my express request that you
      should sit up for us, Arthur,&rdquo; said Julia, sweeping into the room in a
      towering passion. &ldquo;You appear to think it the proper thing for us to dance
      attendance for half an hour at your door&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Four minutes, my dear,&rdquo; James mildly corrected, stepping into the room at
      the end of his wife&rsquo;s pink satin train. &ldquo;I certainly think, Arthur, that
      it would have been more&mdash;becoming if&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo; Arthur interrupted. He was standing with his hand upon
      the door, glancing furtively from one to the other like a trapped animal.
      But James was too obtuse and Julia too angry to notice the look.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Burton placed a chair for his wife and sat down, carefully pulling up
      his new trousers at the knees. &ldquo;Julia and I,&rdquo; he began, &ldquo;feel it to be our
      duty to speak to you seriously about&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t listen to-night; I&mdash;I&rsquo;m not well. My head aches&mdash;you
      must wait.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur spoke in a strange, indistinct voice, with a confused and rambling
      manner. James looked round in surprise.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is there anything the matter with you?&rdquo; he asked anxiously, suddenly
      remembering that Arthur had come from a very hotbed of infection. &ldquo;I hope
      you&rsquo;re not sickening for anything. You look quite feverish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nonsense!&rdquo; Julia interrupted sharply. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only the usual theatricals,
      because he&rsquo;s ashamed to face us. Come here and sit down, Arthur.&rdquo; Arthur
      slowly crossed the room and sat down on the bed. &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo; he said wearily.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Burton coughed, cleared his throat, smoothed his already immaculate
      beard, and began the carefully prepared speech over again:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I feel it to be my duty&mdash;my painful duty&mdash;to speak very
      seriously to you about your extraordinary behaviour in connecting yourself
      with&mdash;a&mdash;law-breakers and incendiaries and&mdash;a&mdash;persons
      of disreputable character. I believe you to have been, perhaps, more
      foolish than depraved&mdash;a&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo; Arthur said again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, I do not wish to be hard on you,&rdquo; James went on, softening a little
      in spite of himself before the weary hopelessness of Arthur&rsquo;s manner. &ldquo;I
      am quite willing to believe that you have been led away by bad companions,
      and to take into account your youth and inexperience and the&mdash;a&mdash;a&mdash;imprudent
      and&mdash;a&mdash;impulsive character which you have, I fear, inherited
      from your mother.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur&rsquo;s eyes wandered slowly to his mother&rsquo;s portrait and back again, but
      he did not speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you will, I feel sure, understand,&rdquo; James continued, &ldquo;that it is
      quite impossible for me to keep any longer in my house a person who has
      brought public disgrace upon a name so highly respected as ours.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo; Arthur repeated once more.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo; said Julia sharply, closing her fan with a snap and laying it
      across her knee. &ldquo;Are you going to have the goodness to say anything but
      &lsquo;Yes,&rsquo; Arthur?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You will do as you think best, of course,&rdquo; he answered slowly, without
      moving. &ldquo;It doesn&rsquo;t matter much either way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t&mdash;matter?&rdquo; James repeated, aghast; and his wife rose with a
      laugh.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, it doesn&rsquo;t matter, doesn&rsquo;t it? Well, James, I hope you understand now
      how much gratitude you may expect in that quarter. I told you what would
      come of showing charity to Papist adventuresses and their&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, hush! Never mind that, my dear!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s all nonsense, James; we&rsquo;ve had more than enough of this
      sentimentality! A love-child setting himself up as a member of the family&mdash;it&rsquo;s
      quite time he did know what his mother was! Why should we be saddled with
      the child of a Popish priest&rsquo;s amourettes? There, then&mdash;look!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She pulled a crumpled sheet of paper out of her pocket and tossed it
      across the table to Arthur. He opened it; the writing was in his mother&rsquo;s
      hand, and was dated four months before his birth. It was a confession,
      addressed to her husband, and with two signatures.
    </p>
    <p>
      Arthur&rsquo;s eyes travelled slowly down the page, past the unsteady letters in
      which her name was written, to the strong, familiar signature: &ldquo;Lorenzo
      Montanelli.&rdquo; For a moment he stared at the writing; then, without a word,
      refolded the paper and laid it down. James rose and took his wife by the
      arm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There, Julia, that will do. Just go downstairs now; it&rsquo;s late, and I want
      to talk a little business with Arthur. It won&rsquo;t interest you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She glanced up at her husband; then back at Arthur, who was silently
      staring at the floor.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He seems half stupid,&rdquo; she whispered.
    </p>
    <p>
      When she had gathered up her train and left the room, James carefully shut
      the door and went back to his chair beside the table. Arthur sat as
      before, perfectly motionless and silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Arthur,&rdquo; James began in a milder tone, now Julia was not there to hear,
      &ldquo;I am very sorry that this has come out. You might just as well not have
      known it. However, all that&rsquo;s over; and I am pleased to see that you can
      behave with such self-control. Julia is a&mdash;a little excited; ladies
      often&mdash;anyhow, I don&rsquo;t want to be too hard on you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stopped to see what effect the kindly words had produced; but Arthur
      was quite motionless.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course, my dear boy,&rdquo; James went on after a moment, &ldquo;this is a
      distressing story altogether, and the best thing we can do is to hold our
      tongues about it. My father was generous enough not to divorce your mother
      when she confessed her fall to him; he only demanded that the man who had
      led her astray should leave the country at once; and, as you know, he went
      to China as a missionary. For my part, I was very much against your having
      anything to do with him when he came back; but my father, just at the
      last, consented to let him teach you, on condition that he never attempted
      to see your mother. I must, in justice, acknowledge that I believe they
      both observed that condition faithfully to the end. It is a very
      deplorable business; but&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur looked up. All the life and expression had gone out of his face; it
      was like a waxen mask.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;D-don&rsquo;t you think,&rdquo; he said softly, with a curious stammering hesitation
      on the words, &ldquo;th-that&mdash;all this&mdash;is&mdash;v-very&mdash;funny?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;FUNNY?&rdquo; James pushed his chair away from the table, and sat staring at
      him, too much petrified for anger. &ldquo;Funny! Arthur, are you mad?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur suddenly threw back his head, and burst into a frantic fit of
      laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Arthur!&rdquo; exclaimed the shipowner, rising with dignity, &ldquo;I am amazed at
      your levity!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no answer but peal after peal of laughter, so loud and
      boisterous that even James began to doubt whether there was not something
      more the matter here than levity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just like a hysterical woman,&rdquo; he muttered, turning, with a contemptuous
      shrug of his shoulders, to tramp impatiently up and down the room.
      &ldquo;Really, Arthur, you&rsquo;re worse than Julia; there, stop laughing! I can&rsquo;t
      wait about here all night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He might as well have asked the crucifix to come down from its pedestal.
      Arthur was past caring for remonstrances or exhortations; he only laughed,
      and laughed, and laughed without end.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is absurd!&rdquo; said James, stopping at last in his irritated pacing to
      and fro. &ldquo;You are evidently too much excited to be reasonable to-night. I
      can&rsquo;t talk business with you if you&rsquo;re going on that way. Come to me
      to-morrow morning after breakfast. And now you had better go to bed.
      Good-night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went out, slamming the door. &ldquo;Now for the hysterics downstairs,&rdquo; he
      muttered as he tramped noisily away. &ldquo;I suppose it&rsquo;ll be tears there!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      The frenzied laughter died on Arthur&rsquo;s lips. He snatched up the hammer
      from the table and flung himself upon the crucifix.
    </p>
    <p>
      With the crash that followed he came suddenly to his senses, standing
      before the empty pedestal, the hammer still in his hand, and the fragments
      of the broken image scattered on the floor about his feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      He threw down the hammer. &ldquo;So easy!&rdquo; he said, and turned away. &ldquo;And what
      an idiot I am!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He sat down by the table, panting heavily for breath, and rested his
      forehead on both hands. Presently he rose, and, going to the wash-stand,
      poured a jugful of cold water over his head and face. He came back quite
      composed, and sat down to think.
    </p>
    <p>
      And it was for such things as these&mdash;for these false and slavish
      people, these dumb and soulless gods&mdash;that he had suffered all these
      tortures of shame and passion and despair; had made a rope to hang
      himself, forsooth, because one priest was a liar. As if they were not all
      liars! Well, all that was done with; he was wiser now. He need only shake
      off these vermin and begin life afresh.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were plenty of goods vessels in the docks; it would be an easy
      matter to stow himself away in one of them, and get across to Canada,
      Australia, Cape Colony&mdash;anywhere. It was no matter for the country,
      if only it was far enough; and, as for the life out there, he could see,
      and if it did not suit him he could try some other place.
    </p>
    <p>
      He took out his purse. Only thirty-three paoli; but his watch was a good
      one. That would help him along a bit; and in any case it was of no
      consequence&mdash;he should pull through somehow. But they would search
      for him, all these people; they would be sure to make inquiries at the
      docks. No; he must put them on a false scent&mdash;make them believe him
      dead; then he should be quite free&mdash;quite free. He laughed softly to
      himself at the thought of the Burtons searching for his corpse. What a
      farce the whole thing was!
    </p>
    <p>
      Taking a sheet of paper, he wrote the first words that occurred to him:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believed in you as I believed in God. God is a thing made of clay, that
      I can smash with a hammer; and you have fooled me with a lie.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He folded up the paper, directed it to Montanelli, and, taking another
      sheet, wrote across it: &ldquo;Look for my body in Darsena.&rdquo; Then he put on his
      hat and went out of the room. Passing his mother&rsquo;s portrait, he looked up
      with a laugh and a shrug of his shoulders. She, too, had lied to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      He crept softly along the corridor, and, slipping back the door-bolts,
      went out on to the great, dark, echoing marble staircase. It seemed to
      yawn beneath him like a black pit as he descended.
    </p>
    <p>
      He crossed the courtyard, treading cautiously for fear of waking Gian
      Battista, who slept on the ground floor. In the wood-cellar at the back
      was a little grated window, opening on the canal and not more than four
      feet from the ground. He remembered that the rusty grating had broken away
      on one side; by pushing a little he could make an aperture wide enough to
      climb out by.
    </p>
    <p>
      The grating was strong, and he grazed his hands badly and tore the sleeve
      of his coat; but that was no matter. He looked up and down the street;
      there was no one in sight, and the canal lay black and silent, an ugly
      trench between two straight and slimy walls. The untried universe might
      prove a dismal hole, but it could hardly be more flat and sordid than the
      corner which he was leaving behind him. There was nothing to regret;
      nothing to look back upon. It had been a pestilent little stagnant world,
      full of squalid lies and clumsy cheats and foul-smelling ditches that were
      not even deep enough to drown a man.
    </p>
    <p>
      He walked along the canal bank, and came out upon the tiny square by the
      Medici palace. It was here that Gemma had run up to him with her vivid
      face, her outstretched hands. Here was the little flight of wet stone
      steps leading down to the moat; and there the fortress scowling across the
      strip of dirty water. He had never noticed before how squat and mean it
      looked.
    </p>
    <p>
      Passing through the narrow streets he reached the Darsena shipping-basin,
      where he took off his hat and flung it into the water. It would be found,
      of course, when they dragged for his body. Then he walked on along the
      water&rsquo;s edge, considering perplexedly what to do next. He must contrive to
      hide on some ship; but it was a difficult thing to do. His only chance
      would be to get on to the huge old Medici breakwater and walk along to the
      further end of it. There was a low-class tavern on the point; probably he
      should find some sailor there who could be bribed.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the dock gates were closed. How should he get past them, and past the
      customs officials? His stock of money would not furnish the high bribe
      that they would demand for letting him through at night and without a
      passport. Besides they might recognize him.
    </p>
    <p>
      As he passed the bronze statue of the &ldquo;Four Moors,&rdquo; a man&rsquo;s figure emerged
      from an old house on the opposite side of the shipping basin and
      approached the bridge. Arthur slipped at once into the deep shadow behind
      the group of statuary and crouched down in the darkness, peeping
      cautiously round the corner of the pedestal.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a soft spring night, warm and starlit. The water lapped against the
      stone walls of the basin and swirled in gentle eddies round the steps with
      a sound as of low laughter. Somewhere near a chain creaked, swinging
      slowly to and fro. A huge iron crane towered up, tall and melancholy in
      the dimness. Black on a shimmering expanse of starry sky and pearly
      cloud-wreaths, the figures of the fettered, struggling slaves stood out in
      vain and vehement protest against a merciless doom.
    </p>
    <p>
      The man approached unsteadily along the water side, shouting an English
      street song. He was evidently a sailor returning from a carouse at some
      tavern. No one else was within sight. As he drew near, Arthur stood up and
      stepped into the middle of the roadway. The sailor broke off in his song
      with an oath, and stopped short.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to speak to you,&rdquo; Arthur said in Italian. &ldquo;Do you understand me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The man shook his head. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s no use talking that patter to me,&rdquo; he said;
      then, plunging into bad French, asked sullenly: &ldquo;What do you want? Why
      can&rsquo;t you let me pass?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just come out of the light here a minute; I want to speak to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah! wouldn&rsquo;t you like it? Out of the light! Got a knife anywhere about
      you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, no, man! Can&rsquo;t you see I only want your help? I&rsquo;ll pay you for it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eh? What? And dressed like a swell, too&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; The sailor
      had relapsed into English. He now moved into the shadow and leaned against
      the railing of the pedestal.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; he said, returning to his atrocious French; &ldquo;and what is it you
      want?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to get away from here&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aha! Stowaway! Want me to hide you? Been up to something, I suppose.
      Stuck a knife into somebody, eh? Just like these foreigners! And where
      might you be wanting to go? Not to the police station, I fancy?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He laughed in his tipsy way, and winked one eye.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What vessel do you belong to?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Carlotta&mdash;Leghorn to Buenos Ayres; shipping oil one way and hides
      the other. She&rsquo;s over there&rdquo;&mdash;pointing in the direction of the
      breakwater&mdash;&ldquo;beastly old hulk!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Buenos Ayres&mdash;yes! Can you hide me anywhere on board?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How much can you give?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not very much; I have only a few paoli.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. Can&rsquo;t do it under fifty&mdash;and cheap at that, too&mdash;a swell
      like you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean by a swell? If you like my clothes you may change with
      me, but I can&rsquo;t give you more money than I have got.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have a watch there. Hand it over.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur took out a lady&rsquo;s gold watch, delicately chased and enamelled, with
      the initials &ldquo;G. B.&rdquo; on the back. It had been his mother&rsquo;s&mdash;but what
      did that matter now?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; remarked the sailor with a quick glance at it. &ldquo;Stolen, of course!
      Let me look!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur drew his hand away. &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I will give you the watch when
      we are on board; not before.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not such a fool as you look, after all! I&rsquo;ll bet it&rsquo;s your first
      scrape, though, eh?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is my business. Ah! there comes the watchman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They crouched down behind the group of statuary and waited till the
      watchman had passed. Then the sailor rose, and, telling Arthur to follow
      him, walked on, laughing foolishly to himself. Arthur followed in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sailor led him back to the little irregular square by the Medici
      palace; and, stopping in a dark corner, mumbled in what was intended for a
      cautious whisper:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait here; those soldier fellows will see you if you come further.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you going to do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Get you some clothes. I&rsquo;m not going to take you on board with that bloody
      coatsleeve.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur glanced down at the sleeve which had been torn by the window
      grating. A little blood from the grazed hand had fallen upon it. Evidently
      the man thought him a murderer. Well, it was of no consequence what people
      thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      After some time the sailor came back, triumphant, with a bundle under his
      arm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Change,&rdquo; he whispered; &ldquo;and make haste about it. I must get back, and
      that old Jew has kept me bargaining and haggling for half an hour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur obeyed, shrinking with instinctive disgust at the first touch of
      second-hand clothes. Fortunately these, though rough and coarse, were
      fairly clean. When he stepped into the light in his new attire, the sailor
      looked at him with tipsy solemnity and gravely nodded his approval.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll do,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This way, and don&rsquo;t make a noise.&rdquo; Arthur, carrying
      his discarded clothes, followed him through a labyrinth of winding canals
      and dark narrow alleys; the mediaeval slum quarter which the people of
      Leghorn call &ldquo;New Venice.&rdquo; Here and there a gloomy old palace, solitary
      among the squalid houses and filthy courts, stood between two noisome
      ditches, with a forlorn air of trying to preserve its ancient dignity and
      yet of knowing the effort to be a hopeless one. Some of the alleys, he
      knew, were notorious dens of thieves, cut-throats, and smugglers; others
      were merely wretched and poverty-stricken.
    </p>
    <p>
      Beside one of the little bridges the sailor stopped, and, looking round to
      see that they were not observed, descended a flight of stone steps to a
      narrow landing stage. Under the bridge was a dirty, crazy old boat.
      Sharply ordering Arthur to jump in and lie down, he seated himself in the
      boat and began rowing towards the harbour&rsquo;s mouth. Arthur lay still on the
      wet and leaky planks, hidden by the clothes which the man had thrown over
      him, and peeping out from under them at the familiar streets and houses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently they passed under a bridge and entered that part of the canal
      which forms a moat for the fortress. The massive walls rose out of the
      water, broad at the base and narrowing upward to the frowning turrets. How
      strong, how threatening they had seemed to him a few hours ago! And now&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      He laughed softly as he lay in the bottom of the boat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hold your noise,&rdquo; the sailor whispered, &ldquo;and keep your head covered!
      We&rsquo;re close to the custom house.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur drew the clothes over his head. A few yards further on the boat
      stopped before a row of masts chained together, which lay across the
      surface of the canal, blocking the narrow waterway between the custom
      house and the fortress wall. A sleepy official came out yawning and bent
      over the water&rsquo;s edge with a lantern in his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Passports, please.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The sailor handed up his official papers. Arthur, half stifled under the
      clothes, held his breath, listening.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A nice time of night to come back to your ship!&rdquo; grumbled the customs
      official. &ldquo;Been out on the spree, I suppose. What&rsquo;s in your boat?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Old clothes. Got them cheap.&rdquo; He held up the waistcoat for inspection.
      The official, lowering his lantern, bent over, straining his eyes to see.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s all right, I suppose. You can pass.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He lifted the barrier and the boat moved slowly out into the dark, heaving
      water. At a little distance Arthur sat up and threw off the clothes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here she is,&rdquo; the sailor whispered, after rowing for some time in
      silence. &ldquo;Keep close behind me and hold your tongue.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He clambered up the side of a huge black monster, swearing under his
      breath at the clumsiness of the landsman, though Arthur&rsquo;s natural agility
      rendered him less awkward than most people would have been in his place.
      Once safely on board, they crept cautiously between dark masses of rigging
      and machinery, and came at last to a hatchway, which the sailor softly
      raised.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Down here!&rdquo; he whispered. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be back in a minute.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The hold was not only damp and dark, but intolerably foul. At first Arthur
      instinctively drew back, half choked by the stench of raw hides and rancid
      oil. Then he remembered the &ldquo;punishment cell,&rdquo; and descended the ladder,
      shrugging his shoulders. Life is pretty much the same everywhere, it
      seemed; ugly, putrid, infested with vermin, full of shameful secrets and
      dark corners. Still, life is life, and he must make the best of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a few minutes the sailor came back with something in his hands which
      Arthur could not distinctly see for the darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, give me the watch and money. Make haste!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Taking advantage of the darkness, Arthur succeeded in keeping back a few
      coins.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must get me something to eat,&rdquo; he said; &ldquo;I am half starved.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve brought it. Here you are.&rdquo; The sailor handed him a pitcher, some
      hard biscuit, and a piece of salt pork. &ldquo;Now mind, you must hide in this
      empty barrel, here, when the customs officers come to examine to-morrow
      morning. Keep as still as a mouse till we&rsquo;re right out at sea. I&rsquo;ll let
      you know when to come out. And won&rsquo;t you just catch it when the captain
      sees you&mdash;that&rsquo;s all! Got the drink safe? Good-night!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The hatchway closed, and Arthur, setting the precious &ldquo;drink&rdquo; in a safe
      place, climbed on to an oil barrel to eat his pork and biscuit. Then he
      curled himself up on the dirty floor; and, for the first time since his
      babyhood, settled himself to sleep without a prayer. The rats scurried
      round him in the darkness; but neither their persistent noise nor the
      swaying of the ship, nor the nauseating stench of oil, nor the prospect of
      to-morrow&rsquo;s sea-sickness, could keep him awake. He cared no more for them
      all than for the broken and dishonoured idols that only yesterday had been
      the gods of his adoration.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
