<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      X
    </h2>
    <p>
      TOWARDS the middle of February the Gadfly went to Leghorn. Gemma had
      introduced him to a young Englishman there, a shipping-agent of liberal
      views, whom she and her husband had known in England. He had on several
      occasions performed little services for the Florentine radicals: had lent
      money to meet an unforeseen emergency, had allowed his business address to
      be used for the party&rsquo;s letters, etc.; but always through Gemma&rsquo;s
      mediumship, and as a private friend of hers. She was, therefore, according
      to party etiquette, free to make use of the connexion in any way that
      might seem good to her. Whether any use could be got out of it was quite
      another question. To ask a friendly sympathizer to lend his address for
      letters from Sicily or to keep a few documents in a corner of his
      counting-house safe was one thing; to ask him to smuggle over a transport
      of firearms for an insurrection was another; and she had very little hope
      of his consenting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can but try,&rdquo; she had said to the Gadfly; &ldquo;but I don&rsquo;t think anything
      will come of it. If you were to go to him with that recommendation and ask
      for five hundred scudi, I dare say he&rsquo;d give them to you at once&mdash;he&rsquo;s
      exceedingly generous,&mdash;and perhaps at a pinch he would lend you his
      passport or hide a fugitive in his cellar; but if you mention such a thing
      as rifles he will stare at you and think we&rsquo;re both demented.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps he may give me a few hints, though, or introduce me to a friendly
      sailor or two,&rdquo; the Gadfly had answered. &ldquo;Anyway, it&rsquo;s worth while to
      try.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      One day at the end of the month he came into her study less carefully
      dressed than usual, and she saw at once from his face that he had good
      news to tell.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, at last! I was beginning to think something must have happened to
      you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought it safer not to write, and I couldn&rsquo;t get back sooner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have just arrived?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; I am straight from the diligence; I looked in to tell you that the
      affair is all settled.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you mean that Bailey has really consented to help?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;More than to help; he has undertaken the whole thing,&mdash;packing,
      transports,&mdash;everything. The rifles will be hidden in bales of
      merchandise and will come straight through from England. His partner,
      Williams, who is a great friend of his, has consented to see the transport
      off from Southampton, and Bailey will slip it through the custom house at
      Leghorn. That is why I have been such a long time; Williams was just
      starting for Southampton, and I went with him as far as Genoa.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To talk over details on the way?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, as long as I wasn&rsquo;t too sea-sick to talk about anything.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you a bad sailor?&rdquo; she asked quickly, remembering how Arthur had
      suffered from sea-sickness one day when her father had taken them both for
      a pleasure-trip.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About as bad as is possible, in spite of having been at sea so much. But
      we had a talk while they were loading at Genoa. You know Williams, I
      think? He&rsquo;s a thoroughly good fellow, trustworthy and sensible; so is
      Bailey, for that matter; and they both know how to hold their tongues.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It seems to me, though, that Bailey is running a serious risk in doing a
      thing like this.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I told him, and he only looked sulky and said: &lsquo;What business is that
      of yours?&rsquo; Just the sort of thing one would expect him to say. If I met
      Bailey in Timbuctoo, I should go up to him and say: &lsquo;Good-morning,
      Englishman.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I can&rsquo;t conceive how you managed to get their consent; Williams, too;
      the last man I should have thought of.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, he objected strongly at first; not on the ground of danger, though,
      but because the thing is &lsquo;so unbusiness-like.&rsquo; But I managed to win him
      over after a bit. And now we will go into details.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      When the Gadfly reached his lodgings the sun had set, and the blossoming
      pyrus japonica that hung over the garden wall looked dark in the fading
      light. He gathered a few sprays and carried them into the house. As he
      opened the study door, Zita started up from a chair in the corner and ran
      towards him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Felice; I thought you were never coming!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His first impulse was to ask her sharply what business she had in his
      study; but, remembering that he had not seen her for three weeks, he held
      out his hand and said, rather frigidly:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-evening, Zita; how are you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She put up her face to be kissed, but he moved past as though he had not
      seen the gesture, and took up a vase to put the pyrus in. The next instant
      the door was flung wide open, and the collie, rushing into the room,
      performed an ecstatic dance round him, barking and whining with delight.
      He put down the flowers and stooped to pat the dog.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Shaitan, how are you, old man? Yes, it&rsquo;s really I. Shake hands,
      like a good dog!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The hard, sullen look came into Zita&rsquo;s face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shall we go to dinner?&rdquo; she asked coldly. &ldquo;I ordered it for you at my
      place, as you wrote that you were coming this evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He turned round quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am v-v-very sorry; you sh-should not have waited for me! I will just
      get a bit tidy and come round at once. P-perhaps you would not mind
      putting these into water.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When he came into Zita&rsquo;s dining room she was standing before a mirror,
      fastening one of the sprays into her dress. She had apparently made up her
      mind to be good-humoured, and came up to him with a little cluster of
      crimson buds tied together.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here is a buttonhole for you; let me put it in your coat.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      All through dinner-time he did his best to be amiable, and kept up a flow
      of small-talk, to which she responded with radiant smiles. Her evident joy
      at his return somewhat embarrassed him; he had grown so accustomed to the
      idea that she led her own life apart from his, among such friends and
      companions as were congenial to her, that it had never occurred to him to
      imagine her as missing him. And yet she must have felt dull to be so much
      excited now.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let us have coffee up on the terrace,&rdquo; she said; &ldquo;it is quite warm this
      evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well. Shall I take your guitar? Perhaps you will sing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She flushed with delight; he was critical about music and did not often
      ask her to sing.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the terrace was a broad wooden bench running round the walls. The
      Gadfly chose a corner with a good view of the hills, and Zita, seating
      herself on the low wall with her feet on the bench, leaned back against a
      pillar of the roof. She did not care much for scenery; she preferred to
      look at the Gadfly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Give me a cigarette,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t believe I have smoked once since
      you went away.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Happy thought! It&rsquo;s just s-s-smoke I want to complete my bliss.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She leaned forward and looked at him earnestly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you really happy?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly&rsquo;s mobile brows went up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; why not? I have had a good dinner; I am looking at one of the m-most
      beautiful views in Europe; and now I&rsquo;m going to have coffee and hear a
      Hungarian folk-song. There is nothing the matter with either my conscience
      or my digestion; what more can man desire?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know another thing you desire.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That!&rdquo; She tossed a little cardboard box into his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;B-burnt almonds! Why d-didn&rsquo;t you tell me before I began to s-smoke?&rdquo; he
      cried reproachfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, you baby! you can eat them when you have done smoking. There comes
      the coffee.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly sipped his coffee and ate his burnt almonds with the grave and
      concentrated enjoyment of a cat drinking cream.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How nice it is to come back to d-decent coffee, after the s-s-stuff one
      gets at Leghorn!&rdquo; he said in his purring drawl.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A very good reason for stopping at home now you are here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not much stopping for me; I&rsquo;m off again to-morrow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The smile died on her face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To-morrow! What for? Where are you going to?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh! two or three p-p-places, on business.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It had been decided between him and Gemma that he must go in person into
      the Apennines to make arrangements with the smugglers of the frontier
      region about the transporting of the firearms. To cross the Papal frontier
      was for him a matter of serious danger; but it had to be done if the work
      was to succeed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Always business!&rdquo; Zita sighed under her breath; and then asked aloud:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shall you be gone long?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; only a fortnight or three weeks, p-p-probably.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose it&rsquo;s some of THAT business?&rdquo; she asked abruptly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;That&rsquo; business?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The business you&rsquo;re always trying to get your neck broken over&mdash;the
      everlasting politics.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has something to do with p-p-politics.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zita threw away her cigarette.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are fooling me,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;You are going into some danger or other.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m going s-s-straight into the infernal regions,&rdquo; he answered languidly.
      &ldquo;D-do you happen to have any friends there you want to send that ivy to?
      You n-needn&rsquo;t pull it all down, though.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She had fiercely torn off a handful of the climber from the pillar, and
      now flung it down with vehement anger.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are going into danger,&rdquo; she repeated; &ldquo;and you won&rsquo;t even say so
      honestly! Do you think I am fit for nothing but to be fooled and joked
      with? You will get yourself hanged one of these days, and never so much as
      say good-bye. It&rsquo;s always politics and politics&mdash;I&rsquo;m sick of
      politics!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;S-so am I,&rdquo; said the Gadfly, yawning lazily; &ldquo;and therefore we&rsquo;ll talk
      about something else&mdash;unless you will sing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, give me the guitar, then. What shall I sing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The ballad of the lost horse; it suits your voice so well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She began to sing the old Hungarian ballad of the man who loses first his
      horse, then his home, and then his sweetheart, and consoles himself with
      the reflection that &ldquo;more was lost at Mohacz field.&rdquo; The song was one of
      the Gadfly&rsquo;s especial favourites; its fierce and tragic melody and the
      bitter stoicism of the refrain appealed to him as no softer music ever
      did.
    </p>
    <p>
      Zita was in excellent voice; the notes came from her lips strong and
      clear, full of the vehement desire of life. She would have sung Italian or
      Slavonic music badly, and German still worse; but she sang the Magyar
      folk-songs splendidly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly listened with wide-open eyes and parted lips; he had never
      heard her sing like this before. As she came to the last line, her voice
      began suddenly to shake.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     &ldquo;Ah, no matter! More was lost&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      She broke down with a sob and hid her face among the ivy leaves.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Zita!&rdquo; The Gadfly rose and took the guitar from her hand. &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She only sobbed convulsively, hiding her face in both hands. He touched
      her on the arm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me what is the matter,&rdquo; he said caressingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me alone!&rdquo; she sobbed, shrinking away. &ldquo;Let me alone!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went quietly back to his seat and waited till the sobs died away.
      Suddenly he felt her arms about his neck; she was kneeling on the floor
      beside him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Felice&mdash;don&rsquo;t go! Don&rsquo;t go away!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We will talk about that afterwards,&rdquo; he said, gently extricating himself
      from the clinging arms. &ldquo;Tell me first what has upset you so. Has anything
      been frightening you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She silently shook her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have I done anything to hurt you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No.&rdquo; She put a hand up against his throat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What, then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You will get killed,&rdquo; she whispered at last. &ldquo;I heard one of those men
      that come here say the other day that you will get into trouble&mdash;and
      when I ask you about it you laugh at me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear child,&rdquo; the Gadfly said, after a little pause of astonishment,
      &ldquo;you have got some exaggerated notion into your head. Very likely I shall
      get killed some day&mdash;that is the natural consequence of being a
      revolutionist. But there is no reason to suppose I am g-g-going to get
      killed just now. I am running no more risk than other people.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Other people&mdash;what are other people to me? If you loved me you
      wouldn&rsquo;t go off this way and leave me to lie awake at night, wondering
      whether you&rsquo;re arrested, or dream you are dead whenever I go to sleep. You
      don&rsquo;t care as much for me as for that dog there!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly rose and walked slowly to the other end of the terrace. He was
      quite unprepared for such a scene as this and at a loss how to answer her.
      Yes, Gemma was right; he had got his life into a tangle that he would have
      hard work to undo.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sit down and let us talk about it quietly,&rdquo; he said, coming back after a
      moment. &ldquo;I think we have misunderstood each other; of course I should not
      have laughed if I had thought you were serious. Try to tell me plainly
      what is troubling you; and then, if there is any misunderstanding, we may
      be able to clear it up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s nothing to clear up. I can see you don&rsquo;t care a brass farthing
      for me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear child, we had better be quite frank with each other. I have
      always tried to be honest about our relationship, and I think I have never
      deceived you as to&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no! you have been honest enough; you have never even pretended to
      think of me as anything else but a prostitute,&mdash;a trumpery bit of
      second-hand finery that plenty of other men have had before you&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, Zita! I have never thought that way about any living thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have never loved me,&rdquo; she insisted sullenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I have never loved you. Listen to me, and try to think as little harm
      of me as you can.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who said I thought any harm of you? I&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait a minute. This is what I want to say: I have no belief whatever in
      conventional moral codes, and no respect for them. To me the relations
      between men and women are simply questions of personal likes and dislikes&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And of money,&rdquo; she interrupted with a harsh little laugh. He winced and
      hesitated a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That, of course, is the ugly part of the matter. But believe me, if I had
      thought that you disliked me, or felt any repulsion to the thing, I would
      never have suggested it, or taken advantage of your position to persuade
      you to it. I have never done that to any woman in my life, and I have
      never told a woman a lie about my feeling for her. You may trust me that I
      am speaking the truth&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused a moment, but she did not answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought,&rdquo; he went on; &ldquo;that if a man is alone in the world and feels
      the need of&mdash;of a woman&rsquo;s presence about him, and if he can find a
      woman who is attractive to him and to whom he is not repulsive, he has a
      right to accept, in a grateful and friendly spirit, such pleasure as that
      woman is willing to give him, without entering into any closer bond. I saw
      no harm in the thing, provided only there is no unfairness or insult or
      deceit on either side. As for your having been in that relation with other
      men before I met you, I did not think about that. I merely thought that
      the connexion would be a pleasant and harmless one for both of us, and
      that either was free to break it as soon as it became irksome. If I was
      mistaken&mdash;if you have grown to look upon it differently&mdash;then&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then?&rdquo; she whispered, without looking up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I have done you a wrong, and I am very sorry. But I did not mean to
      do it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You &lsquo;did not mean&rsquo; and you &lsquo;thought&rsquo;&mdash;&mdash;Felice, are you made of
      cast iron? Have you never been in love with a woman in your life that you
      can&rsquo;t see I love you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A sudden thrill went through him; it was so long since anyone had said to
      him: &ldquo;I love you.&rdquo; Instantly she started up and flung her arms round him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Felice, come away with me! Come away from this dreadful country and all
      these people and their politics! What have we got to do with them? Come
      away, and we will be happy together. Let us go to South America, where you
      used to live.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The physical horror of association startled him back into self-control; he
      unclasped her hands from his neck and held them in a steady grasp.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Zita! Try to understand what I am saying to you. I do not love you; and
      if I did I would not come away with you. I have my work in Italy, and my
      comrades&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And someone else that you love better than me!&rdquo; she cried out fiercely.
      &ldquo;Oh, I could kill you! It is not your comrades you care about; it&rsquo;s&mdash;&mdash;
      I know who it is!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush!&rdquo; he said quietly. &ldquo;You are excited and imagining things that are
      not true.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You suppose I am thinking of Signora Bolla? I&rsquo;m not so easily duped! You
      only talk politics with her; you care no more for her than you do for me.
      It&rsquo;s that Cardinal!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly started as if he had been shot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cardinal?&rdquo; he repeated mechanically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cardinal Montanelli, that came here preaching in the autumn. Do you think
      I didn&rsquo;t see your face when his carriage passed? You were as white as my
      pocket-handkerchief! Why, you&rsquo;re shaking like a leaf now because I
      mentioned his name!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stood up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t know what you are talking about,&rdquo; he said very slowly and
      softly. &ldquo;I&mdash;hate the Cardinal. He is the worst enemy I have.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Enemy or no, you love him better than you love anyone else in the world.
      Look me in the face and say that is not true, if you can!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He turned away, and looked out into the garden. She watched him furtively,
      half-scared at what she had done; there was something terrifying in his
      silence. At last she stole up to him, like a frightened child, and timidly
      pulled his sleeve. He turned round.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is true,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0018" id="link2HCH0018">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
