<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>Montanelli’s anger did not make him neglectful of his promise. He protested so emphatically against the manner in which the Gadfly had been chained that the unfortunate Governor, who by now was at his wit’s end, knocked off all the fetters in the recklessness of despair. “How am I to know,” he grumbled to the adjutant, “what His Eminence will object to next? If he calls a simple pair of handcuffs ‘cruelty,’ he’ll be exclaiming against the window-bars presently, or wanting me to feed Rivarez on oysters and truffles. In my young days malefactors were malefactors and were treated accordingly, and nobody thought a traitor any better than a thief. But it’s the fashion to be seditious nowadays; and His Eminence seems inclined to encourage all the scoundrels in the country.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t see what business he has got to interfere at all,” the adjutant remarked. “He is not a legate and has no authority in civil and military affairs. By law⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What is the use of talking about law? You can’t expect anyone to respect laws after the Holy Father has opened the prisons and turned the whole crew of Liberal scamps loose on us! It’s a positive infatuation! Of course Monsignor Montanelli will give himself airs; he was quiet enough under His Holiness the late Pope, but he’s cock of the walk now. He has jumped into favour all at once and can do as he pleases. How am I to oppose him? He may have secret authorization from the Vatican, for all I know. Everything’s topsy-turvy now; you can’t tell from day to day what may happen next. In the good old times one knew what to be at, but nowadays⁠—”</p>
			<p>The Governor shook his head ruefully. A world in which Cardinals troubled themselves over trifles of prison discipline and talked about the “rights” of political offenders was a world that was growing too complex for him.</p>
			<p>The Gadfly, for his part, had returned to the fortress in a state of nervous excitement bordering on hysteria. The meeting with Montanelli had strained his endurance almost to breaking-point; and his final brutality about the variety show had been uttered in sheer desperation, merely to cut short an interview which, in another five minutes, would have ended in tears.</p>
			<p>Called up for interrogation in the afternoon of the same day, he did nothing but go into convulsions of laughter at every question put to him; and when the Governor, worried out of all patience, lost his temper and began to swear, he only laughed more immoderately than ever. The unlucky Governor fumed and stormed and threatened his refractory prisoner with impossible punishments; but finally came, as James Burton had come long ago, to the conclusion that it was mere waste of breath and temper to argue with a person in so unreasonable a state of mind.</p>
			<p>The Gadfly was once more taken back to his cell; and there lay down upon the pallet, in the mood of black and hopeless depression which always succeeded to his boisterous fits. He lay till evening without moving, without even thinking; he had passed, after the vehement emotion of the morning, into a strange, half-apathetic state, in which his own misery was hardly more to him than a dull and mechanical weight, pressing on some wooden thing that had forgotten to be a soul. In truth, it was of little consequence how all ended; the one thing that mattered to any sentient being was to be spared unbearable pain, and whether the relief came from altered conditions or from the deadening of the power to feel, was a question of no moment. Perhaps he would succeed in escaping; perhaps they would kill him; in any case he should never see the Padre again, and it was all vanity and vexation of spirit.</p>
			<p>One of the warders brought in supper, and the Gadfly looked up with heavy-eyed indifference.</p>
			<p>“What time is it?”</p>
			<p>“Six o’clock. Your supper, sir.”</p>
			<p>He looked with disgust at the stale, foul-smelling, half-cold mess, and turned his head away. He was feeling bodily ill as well as depressed; and the sight of the food sickened him.</p>
			<p>“You will be ill if you don’t eat,” said the soldier hurriedly. “Take a bit of bread, anyway; it’ll do you good.”</p>
			<p>The man spoke with a curious earnestness of tone, lifting a piece of sodden bread from the plate and putting it down again. All the conspirator awoke in the Gadfly; he had guessed at once that there was something hidden in the bread.</p>
			<p>“You can leave it; I’ll eat a bit by and by,” he said carelessly. The door was open, and he knew that the sergeant on the stairs could hear every word spoken between them.</p>
			<p>When the door was locked on him again, and he had satisfied himself that no one was watching at the spyhole, he took up the piece of bread and carefully crumbled it away. In the middle was the thing he had expected, a bundle of small files. It was wrapped in a bit of paper, on which a few words were written. He smoothed the paper out carefully and carried it to what little light there was. The writing was crowded into so narrow a space, and on such thin paper, that it was very difficult to read.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“The door is unlocked, and there is no moon. Get the filing done as fast as possible, and come by the passage between two and three. We are quite ready and may not have another chance.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>He crushed the paper feverishly in his hand. All the preparations were ready, then, and he had only to file the window bars; how lucky it was that the chains were off! He need not stop about filing them. How many bars were there? Two, four; and each must be filed in two places: eight. Oh, he could manage that in the course of the night if he made haste⁠—How had Gemma and Martini contrived to get everything ready so quickly⁠—disguises, passports, hiding-places? They must have worked like carthorses to do it⁠—And it was her plan that had been adopted after all. He laughed a little to himself at his own foolishness; as if it mattered whether the plan was hers or not, once it was a good one! And yet he could not help being glad that it was she who had struck on the idea of his utilizing the subterranean passage, instead of letting himself down by a rope-ladder, as the smugglers had at first suggested. Hers was the more complex and difficult plan, but did not involve, as the other did, a risk to the life of the sentinel on duty outside the east wall. Therefore, when the two schemes had been laid before him, he had unhesitatingly chosen Gemma’s.</p>
			<p>The arrangement was that the friendly guard who went by the nickname of “The Cricket” should seize the first opportunity of unlocking, without the knowledge of his fellows, the iron gate leading from the courtyard into the subterranean passage underneath the ramparts, and should then replace the key on its nail in the guardroom. The Gadfly, on receiving information of this, was to file through the bars of his window, tear his shirt into strips and plait them into a rope, by means of which he could let himself down on to the broad east wall of the courtyard. Along this wall he was to creep on hands and knees while the sentinel was looking in the opposite direction, lying flat upon the masonry whenever the man turned towards him. At the southeast corner was a half-ruined turret. It was upheld, to some extent, by a thick growth of ivy; but great masses of crumbling stone had fallen inward and lay in the courtyard, heaped against the wall. From this turret he was to climb down by the ivy and the heaps of stone into the courtyard; and, softly opening the unlocked gate, to make his way along the passage to a subterranean tunnel communicating with it. Centuries ago this tunnel had formed a secret corridor between the fortress and a tower on the neighbouring hill; now it was quite disused and blocked in many places by the falling in of the rocks. No one but the smugglers knew of a certain carefully-hidden hole in the mountainside which they had bored through to the tunnel; no one suspected that stores of forbidden merchandise were often kept, for weeks together, under the very ramparts of the fortress itself, while the customs-officers were vainly searching the houses of the sullen, wrathful-eyed mountaineers. At this hole the Gadfly was to creep out on to the hillside, and make his way in the dark to a lonely spot where Martini and a smuggler would be waiting for him. The one great difficulty was that opportunities to unlock the gate after the evening patrol did not occur every night, and the descent from the window could not be made in very clear weather without too great a risk of being observed by the sentinel. Now that there was really a fair chance of success, it must not be missed.</p>
			<p>He sat down and began to eat some of the bread. It at least did not disgust him like the rest of the prison food, and he must eat something to keep up his strength.</p>
			<p>He had better lie down a bit, too, and try to get a little sleep; it would not be safe to begin filing before ten o’clock, and he would have a hard night’s work.</p>
			<p>And so, after all, the Padre had been thinking of letting him escape! That was like the Padre. But he, for his part, would never consent to it. Anything rather than that! If he escaped, it should be his own doing and that of his comrades; he would have no favours from priests.</p>
			<p>How hot it was! Surely it must be going to thunder; the air was so close and oppressive. He moved restlessly on the pallet and put the bandaged right hand behind his head for a pillow; then drew it away again. How it burned and throbbed! And all the old wounds were beginning to ache, with a dull, faint persistence. What was the matter with them? Oh, absurd! It was only the thundery weather. He would go to sleep and get a little rest before beginning his filing.</p>
			<p>Eight bars, and all so thick and strong! How many more were there left to file? Surely not many. He must have been filing for hours⁠—interminable hours⁠—yes, of course, that was what made his arm ache⁠—And how it ached; right through to the very bone! But it could hardly be the filing that made his side ache so; and the throbbing, burning pain in the lame leg⁠—was that from filing?</p>
			<p>He started up. No, he had not been asleep; he had been dreaming with open eyes⁠—dreaming of filing, and it was all still to do. There stood the window-bars, untouched, strong and firm as ever. And there was ten striking from the clock-tower in the distance. He must get to work.</p>
			<p>He looked through the spyhole, and, seeing that no one was watching, took one of the files from his breast.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>No, there was nothing the matter with him⁠—nothing! It was all imagination. The pain in his side was indigestion, or a chill, or some such thing; not much wonder, after three weeks of this insufferable prison food and air. As for the aching and throbbing all over, it was partly nervous trouble and partly want of exercise. Yes, that was it, no doubt; want of exercise. How absurd not to have thought of that before!</p>
			<p>He would sit down a little bit, though, and let it pass before he got to work. It would be sure to go over in a minute or two.</p>
			<p>To sit still was worse than all. When he sat still he was at its mercy, and his face grew gray with fear. No, he must get up and set to work, and shake it off. It should depend upon his will to feel or not to feel; and he would not feel, he would force it back.</p>
			<p>He stood up again and spoke to himself, aloud and distinctly:</p>
			<p>“I am not ill; I have no time to be ill. I have those bars to file, and I am not going to be ill.”</p>
			<p>Then he began to file.</p>
			<p>A quarter-past ten⁠—half-past ten⁠—a quarter to eleven⁠—He filed and filed, and every grating scrape of the iron was as though someone were filing on his body and brain. “I wonder which will be filed through first,” he said to himself with a little laugh; “I or the bars?” And he set his teeth and went on filing.</p>
			<p>Half-past eleven. He was still filing, though the hand was stiff and swollen and would hardly grasp the tool. No, he dared not stop to rest; if he once put the horrible thing down he should never have the courage to begin again.</p>
			<p>The sentinel moved outside the door, and the butt end of his carbine scratched against the lintel. The Gadfly stopped and looked round, the file still in his lifted hand. Was he discovered?</p>
			<p>A little round pellet had been shot through the spyhole and was lying on the floor. He laid down the file and stooped to pick up the round thing. It was a bit of rolled paper.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It was a long way to go down and down, with the black waves rushing about him⁠—how they roared⁠—!</p>
			<p>Ah, yes! He was only stooping down to pick up the paper. He was a bit giddy; many people are when they stoop. There was nothing the matter with him⁠—nothing.</p>
			<p>He picked it up, carried it to the light, and unfolded it steadily.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“Come tonight, whatever happens; the Cricket will be transferred tomorrow to another service. This is our only chance.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>He destroyed the paper as he had done the former one, picked up his file again, and went back to work, dogged and mute and desperate.</p>
			<p>One o’clock. He had been working for three hours now, and six of the eight bars were filed. Two more, and then, to climb⁠—</p>
			<p>He began to recall the former occasions when these terrible attacks had come on. The last had been the one at New Year; and he shuddered as he remembered those five nights. But that time it had not come on so suddenly; he had never known it so sudden.</p>
			<p>He dropped the file and flung out both hands blindly, praying, in his utter desperation, for the first time since he had been an atheist; praying to anything⁠—to nothing⁠—to everything.</p>
			<p>“Not tonight! Oh, let me be ill tomorrow! I will bear anything tomorrow⁠—only not tonight!”</p>
			<p>He stood still for a moment, with both hands up to his temples; then he took up the file once more, and once more went back to his work.</p>
			<p>Half-past one. He had begun on the last bar. His shirtsleeve was bitten to rags; there was blood on his lips and a red mist before his eyes, and the sweat poured from his forehead as he filed, and filed, and filed⁠—</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>After sunrise Montanelli fell asleep. He was utterly worn out with the restless misery of the night and slept for a little while quietly; then he began to dream.</p>
			<p>At first he dreamed vaguely, confusedly; broken fragments of images and fancies followed each other, fleeting and incoherent, but all filled with the same dim sense of struggle and pain, the same shadow of indefinable dread. Presently he began to dream of sleeplessness; the old, frightful, familiar dream that had been a terror to him for years. And even as he dreamed he recognized that he had been through it all before.</p>
			<p>He was wandering about in a great empty place, trying to find some quiet spot where he could lie down and sleep. Everywhere there were people, walking up and down; talking, laughing, shouting; praying, ringing bells, and clashing metal instruments together. Sometimes he would get away to a little distance from the noise, and would lie down, now on the grass, now on a wooden bench, now on some slab of stone. He would shut his eyes and cover them with both hands to keep out the light; and would say to himself: “Now I will get to sleep.” Then the crowds would come sweeping up to him, shouting, yelling, calling him by name, begging him: “Wake up! Wake up, quick; we want you!”</p>
			<p>Again: he was in a great palace, full of gorgeous rooms, with beds and couches and low soft lounges. It was night, and he said to himself: “Here, at last, I shall find a quiet place to sleep.” But when he chose a dark room and lay down, someone came in with a lamp, flashing the merciless light into his eyes, and said: “Get up; you are wanted.”</p>
			<p>He rose and wandered on, staggering and stumbling like a creature wounded to death; and heard the clocks strike one, and knew that half the night was gone already⁠—the precious night that was so short. Two, three, four, five⁠—by six o’clock the whole town would wake up and there would be no more silence.</p>
			<p>He went into another room and would have lain down on a bed, but someone started up from the pillows, crying out: “This bed is mine!” and he shrank away with despair in his heart.</p>
			<p>Hour after hour struck, and still he wandered on and on, from room to room, from house to house, from corridor to corridor. The horrible gray dawn was creeping near and nearer; the clocks were striking five; the night was gone and he had found no rest. Oh, misery! Another day⁠—another day!</p>
			<p>He was in a long, subterranean corridor, a low, vaulted passage that seemed to have no end. It was lighted with glaring lamps and chandeliers; and through its grated roof came the sounds of dancing and laughter and merry music. Up there, in the world of the live people overhead, there was some festival, no doubt. Oh, for a place to hide and sleep; some little place, were it even a grave! And as he spoke he stumbled over an open grave. An open grave, smelling of death and rottenness⁠—Ah, what matter, so he could but sleep!</p>
			<p>“This grave is mine!” It was Gladys; and she raised her head and stared at him over the rotting shroud. Then he knelt down and stretched out his arms to her.</p>
			<p>“Gladys! Gladys! Have a little pity on me; let me creep into this narrow space and sleep. I do not ask you for your love; I will not touch you, will not speak to you; only let me lie down beside you and sleep! Oh, love, it is so long since I have slept! I cannot bear another day. The light glares in upon my soul; the noise is beating my brain to dust. Gladys, let me come in here and sleep!”</p>
			<p>And he would have drawn her shroud across his eyes. But she shrank away, screaming:</p>
			<p>“It is sacrilege; you are a priest!”</p>
			<p>On and on he wandered, and came out upon the seashore, on the barren rocks where the fierce light struck down, and the water moaned its low, perpetual wail of unrest. “Ah!” he said; “the sea will be more merciful; it, too, is wearied unto death and cannot sleep.”</p>
			<p>Then Arthur rose up from the deep, and cried aloud:</p>
			<p>“This sea is mine!”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Your Eminence! Your Eminence!”</p>
			<p>Montanelli awoke with a start. His servant was knocking at the door. He rose mechanically and opened it, and the man saw how wild and scared he looked.</p>
			<p>“Your Eminence⁠—are you ill?”</p>
			<p>He drew both hands across his forehead.</p>
			<p>“No; I was asleep, and you startled me.”</p>
			<p>“I am very sorry; I thought I had heard you moving early this morning, and I supposed⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Is it late now?”</p>
			<p>“It is nine o’clock, and the Governor has called. He says he has very important business, and knowing Your Eminence to be an early riser⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Is he downstairs? I will come presently.”</p>
			<p>He dressed and went downstairs.</p>
			<p>“I am afraid this is an unceremonious way to call upon Your Eminence,” the Governor began.</p>
			<p>“I hope there is nothing the matter?”</p>
			<p>“There is very much the matter. Rivarez has all but succeeded in escaping.”</p>
			<p>“Well, so long as he has not quite succeeded there is no harm done. How was it?”</p>
			<p>“He was found in the courtyard, right against the little iron gate. When the patrol came in to inspect the courtyard at three o’clock this morning one of the men stumbled over something on the ground; and when they brought the light up they found Rivarez lying across the path unconscious. They raised an alarm at once and called me up; and when I went to examine his cell I found all the window-bars filed through and a rope made of torn body-linen hanging from one of them. He had let himself down and climbed along the wall. The iron gate, which leads into the subterranean tunnels, was found to be unlocked. That looks as if the guards had been suborned.”</p>
			<p>“But how did he come to be lying across the path? Did he fall from the rampart and hurt himself?”</p>
			<p>“That is what I thought at first. Your Eminence; but the prison surgeon can’t find any trace of a fall. The soldier who was on duty yesterday says that Rivarez looked very ill last night when he brought in the supper, and did not eat anything. But that must be nonsense; a sick man couldn’t file those bars through and climb along that roof. It’s not in reason.”</p>
			<p>“Does he give any account of himself?”</p>
			<p>“He is unconscious, Your Eminence.”</p>
			<p>“Still?”</p>
			<p>“He just half comes to himself from time to time and moans, and then goes off again.”</p>
			<p>“That is very strange. What does the doctor think?”</p>
			<p>“He doesn’t know what to think. There is no trace of heart-disease that he can find to account for the thing; but whatever is the matter with him, it is something that must have come on suddenly, just when he had nearly managed to escape. For my part, I believe he was struck down by the direct intervention of a merciful Providence.”</p>
			<p>Montanelli frowned slightly.</p>
			<p>“What are you going to do with him?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“That is a question I shall settle in a very few days. In the meantime I have had a good lesson. That is what comes of taking off the irons⁠—with all due respect to Your Eminence.”</p>
			<p>“I hope,” Montanelli interrupted, “that you will at least not replace the fetters while he is ill. A man in the condition you describe can hardly make any more attempts to escape.”</p>
			<p>“I shall take good care he doesn’t,” the Governor muttered to himself as he went out. “His Eminence can go hang with his sentimental scruples for all I care. Rivarez is chained pretty tight now, and is going to stop so, ill or not.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“But how can it have happened? To faint away at the last moment, when everything was ready; when he was at the very gate! It’s like some hideous joke.”</p>
			<p>“I tell you,” Martini answered, “the only thing I can think of is that one of these attacks must have come on, and that he must have struggled against it as long as his strength lasted and have fainted from sheer exhaustion when he got down into the courtyard.”</p>
			<p>Marcone knocked the ashes savagely from his pipe.</p>
			<p>“Well, anyhow, that’s the end of it; we can’t do anything for him now, poor fellow.”</p>
			<p>“Poor fellow!” Martini echoed, under his breath. He was beginning to realise that to him, too, the world would look empty and dismal without the Gadfly.</p>
			<p>“What does she think?” the smuggler asked, glancing towards the other end of the room, where Gemma sat alone, her hands lying idly in her lap, her eyes looking straight before her into blank nothingness.</p>
			<p>“I have not asked her; she has not spoken since I brought her the news. We had best not disturb her just yet.”</p>
			<p>She did not appear to be conscious of their presence, but they both spoke with lowered voices, as though they were looking at a corpse. After a dreary little pause, Marcone rose and put away his pipe.</p>
			<p>“I will come back this evening,” he said; but Martini stopped him with a gesture.</p>
			<p>“Don’t go yet; I want to speak to you.” He dropped his voice still lower and continued in almost a whisper:</p>
			<p>“Do you believe there is really no hope?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t see what hope there can be now. We can’t attempt it again. Even if he were well enough to manage his part of the thing, we couldn’t do our share. The sentinels are all being changed, on suspicion. The Cricket won’t get another chance, you may be sure.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you think,” Martini asked suddenly; “that, when he recovers, something might be done by calling off the sentinels?”</p>
			<p>“Calling off the sentinels? What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Well, it has occurred to me that if I were to get in the Governor’s way when the procession passes close by the fortress on Corpus Domini day and fire in his face, all the sentinels would come rushing to get hold of me, and some of you fellows could perhaps help Rivarez out in the confusion. It really hardly amounts to a plan; it only came into my head.”</p>
			<p>“I doubt whether it could be managed,” Marcone answered with a very grave face. “Certainly it would want a lot of thinking out for anything to come of it. But”⁠—he stopped and looked at Martini⁠—“if it should be possible⁠—would you do it?”</p>
			<p>Martini was a reserved man at ordinary times; but this was not an ordinary time. He looked straight into the smuggler’s face.</p>
			<p>“Would I do it?” he repeated. “Look at her!”</p>
			<p>There was no need for further explanations; in saying that he had said all. Marcone turned and looked across the room.</p>
			<p>She had not moved since their conversation began. There was no doubt, no fear, even no grief in her face; there was nothing in it but the shadow of death. The smuggler’s eyes filled with tears as he looked at her.</p>
			<p>“Make haste, Michele!” he said, throwing open the verandah door and looking out. “Aren’t you nearly done, you two? There are a hundred and fifty things to do!”</p>
			<p>Michele, followed by Gino, came in from the verandah.</p>
			<p>“I am ready now,” he said. “I only want to ask the signora⁠—”</p>
			<p>He was moving towards her when Martini caught him by the arm.</p>
			<p>“Don’t disturb her; she’s better alone.”</p>
			<p>“Let her be!” Marcone added. “We shan’t do any good by meddling. God knows, it’s hard enough on all of us; but it’s worse for her, poor soul!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
