<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      III
    </h2>
    <p>
      &ldquo;AND I once more most earnestly assure Your Eminence that your refusal is
      endangering the peace of the town.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Governor tried to preserve the respectful tone due to a high dignitary
      of the Church; but there was audible irritation in his voice. His liver
      was out of order, his wife was running up heavy bills, and his temper had
      been sorely tried during the last three weeks. A sullen, disaffected
      populace, whose dangerous mood grew daily more apparent; a district
      honeycombed with plots and bristling with hidden weapons; an inefficient
      garrison, of whose loyalty he was more than doubtful, and a Cardinal whom
      he had pathetically described to his adjutant as the &ldquo;incarnation of
      immaculate pig-headedness,&rdquo; had already reduced him to the verge of
      desperation. Now he was saddled with the Gadfly, an animated quintessence
      of the spirit of mischief.
    </p>
    <p>
      Having begun by disabling both the Governor&rsquo;s favourite nephew and his
      most valuable spy, the &ldquo;crooked Spanish devil&rdquo; had followed up his
      exploits in the market-place by suborning the guards, browbeating the
      interrogating officers, and &ldquo;turning the prison into a bear-garden.&rdquo; He
      had now been three weeks in the fortress, and the authorities of
      Brisighella were heartily sick of their bargain. They had subjected him to
      interrogation upon interrogation; and after employing, to obtain
      admissions from him, every device of threat, persuasion, and stratagem
      which their ingenuity could suggest, remained just as wise as on the day
      of his capture. They had begun to realize that it would perhaps have been
      better to send him into Ravenna at once. It was, however, too late to
      rectify the mistake. The Governor, when sending in to the Legate his
      report of the arrest, had begged, as a special favour, permission to
      superintend personally the investigation of this case; and, his request
      having been graciously acceded to, he could not now withdraw without a
      humiliating confession that he was overmatched.
    </p>
    <p>
      The idea of settling the difficulty by a courtmartial had, as Gemma and
      Michele had foreseen, presented itself to him as the only satisfactory
      solution; and Cardinal Montanelli&rsquo;s stubborn refusal to countenance this
      was the last drop which made the cup of his vexations overflow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;that if Your Eminence knew what I and my assistants
      have put up with from this man you would feel differently about the
      matter. I fully understand and respect the conscientious objection to
      irregularities in judicial proceedings; but this is an exceptional case
      and calls for exceptional measures.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is no case,&rdquo; Montanelli answered, &ldquo;which calls for injustice; and
      to condemn a civilian by the judgment of a secret military tribunal is
      both unjust and illegal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The case amounts to this, Your Eminence: The prisoner is manifestly
      guilty of several capital crimes. He joined the infamous attempt of
      Savigno, and the military commission nominated by Monsignor Spinola would
      certainly have had him shot or sent to the galleys then, had he not
      succeeded in escaping to Tuscany. Since that time he has never ceased
      plotting. He is known to be an influential member of one of the most
      pestilent secret societies in the country. He is gravely suspected of
      having consented to, if not inspired, the assassination of no less than
      three confidential police agents. He has been caught&mdash;one might
      almost say&mdash;in the act of smuggling firearms into the Legation. He
      has offered armed resistance to authority and seriously wounded two
      officials in the discharge of their duty, and he is now a standing menace
      to the peace and order of the town. Surely, in such a case, a
      court-martial is justifiable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whatever the man has done,&rdquo; Montanelli replied, &ldquo;he has the right to be
      judged according to law.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The ordinary course of law involves delay, Your Eminence, and in this
      case every moment is precious. Besides everything else, I am in constant
      terror of his escaping.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If there is any danger of that, it rests with you to guard him more
      closely.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do my best, Your Eminence, but I am dependent upon the prison staff,
      and the man seems to have bewitched them all. I have changed the guard
      four times within three weeks; I have punished the soldiers till I am
      tired of it, and nothing is of any use. I can&rsquo;t prevent their carrying
      letters backwards and forwards. The fools are in love with him as if he
      were a woman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is very curious. There must be something remarkable about him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a remarkable amount of devilry&mdash;I beg pardon, Your Eminence,
      but really this man is enough to try the patience of a saint. It&rsquo;s hardly
      credible, but I have to conduct all the interrogations myself, for the
      regular officer cannot stand it any longer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How is that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s difficult to explain. Your Eminence, but you would understand if you
      had once heard the way he goes on. One might think the interrogating
      officer were the criminal and he the judge.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what is there so terrible that he can do? He can refuse to answer
      your questions, of course; but he has no weapon except silence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And a tongue like a razor. We are all mortal, Your Eminence, and most of
      us have made mistakes in our time that we don&rsquo;t want published on the
      house-tops. That&rsquo;s only human nature, and it&rsquo;s hard on a man to have his
      little slips of twenty years ago raked up and thrown in his teeth&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Has Rivarez brought up some personal secret of the interrogating
      officer?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, really&mdash;the poor fellow got into debt when he was a cavalry
      officer, and borrowed a little sum from the regimental funds&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stole public money that had been intrusted to him, in fact?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course it was very wrong, Your Eminence; but his friends paid it back
      at once, and the affair was hushed up,&mdash;he comes of a good family,&mdash;and
      ever since then he has been irreproachable. How Rivarez found out about it
      I can&rsquo;t conceive; but the first thing he did at interrogation was to bring
      up this old scandal&mdash;before the subaltern, too! And with as innocent
      a face as if he were saying his prayers! Of course the story&rsquo;s all over
      the Legation by now. If Your Eminence would only be present at one of the
      interrogations, I am sure you would realize&mdash;&mdash; He needn&rsquo;t know
      anything about it. You might overhear him from&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli turned round and looked at the Governor with an expression
      which his face did not often wear.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am a minister of religion,&rdquo; he said; &ldquo;not a police-spy; and
      eavesdropping forms no part of my professional duties.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;I didn&rsquo;t mean to give offence&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think we shall not get any good out of discussing this question
      further. If you will send the prisoner here, I will have a talk with him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I venture very respectfully to advise Your Eminence not to attempt it.
      The man is perfectly incorrigible. It would be both safer and wiser to
      overstep the letter of the law for this once, and get rid of him before he
      does any more mischief. It is with great diffidence that I venture to
      press the point after what Your Eminence has said; but after all I am
      responsible to Monsignor the Legate for the order of the town&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I,&rdquo; Montanelli interrupted, &ldquo;am responsible to God and His Holiness
      that there shall be no underhand dealing in my diocese. Since you press me
      in the matter, colonel, I take my stand upon my privilege as Cardinal. I
      will not allow a secret court-martial in this town in peace-time. I will
      receive the prisoner here, and alone, at ten to-morrow morning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As Your Eminence pleases,&rdquo; the Governor replied with sulky
      respectfulness; and went away, grumbling to himself: &ldquo;They&rsquo;re about a
      pair, as far as obstinacy goes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He told no one of the approaching interview till it was actually time to
      knock off the prisoner&rsquo;s chains and start for the palace. It was quite
      enough, as he remarked to his wounded nephew, to have this Most Eminent
      son of Balaam&rsquo;s ass laying down the law, without running any risk of the
      soldiers plotting with Rivarez and his friends to effect an escape on the
      way.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the Gadfly, strongly guarded, entered the room where Montanelli was
      writing at a table covered with papers, a sudden recollection came over
      him, of a hot midsummer afternoon when he had sat turning over manuscript
      sermons in a study much like this. The shutters had been closed, as they
      were here, to keep out the heat, and a fruitseller&rsquo;s voice outside had
      called: &ldquo;Fragola! Fragola!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He shook the hair angrily back from his eyes and set his mouth in a smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli looked up from his papers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can wait in the hall,&rdquo; he said to the guards.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;May it please Your Eminence,&rdquo; began the sergeant, in a lowered voice and
      with evident nervousness, &ldquo;the colonel thinks that this prisoner is
      dangerous and that it would be better&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A sudden flash came into Montanelli&rsquo;s eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can wait in the hall,&rdquo; he repeated quietly; and the sergeant,
      saluting and stammering excuses with a frightened face, left the room with
      his men.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sit down, please,&rdquo; said the Cardinal, when the door was shut. The Gadfly
      obeyed in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signor Rivarez,&rdquo; Montanelli began after a pause, &ldquo;I wish to ask you a few
      questions, and shall be very much obliged to you if you will answer them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly smiled. &ldquo;My ch-ch-chief occupation at p-p-present is to be
      asked questions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And&mdash;not to answer them? So I have heard; but these questions are
      put by officials who are investigating your case and whose duty is to use
      your answers as evidence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And th-those of Your Eminence?&rdquo; There was a covert insult in the tone
      more than in the words, and the Cardinal understood it at once; but his
      face did not lose its grave sweetness of expression.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mine,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;whether you answer them or not, will remain between you
      and me. If they should trench upon your political secrets, of course you
      will not answer. Otherwise, though we are complete strangers to each
      other, I hope that you will do so, as a personal favour to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am ent-t-tirely at the service of Your Eminence.&rdquo; He said it with a
      little bow, and a face that would have taken the heart to ask favours out
      of the daughters of the horse-leech.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;First, then, you are said to have been smuggling firearms into this
      district. What are they wanted for?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;T-t-to k-k-kill rats with.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is a terrible answer. Are all your fellow-men rats in your eyes if
      they cannot think as you do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;S-s-some of them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli leaned back in his chair and looked at him in silence for a
      little while.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is that on your hand?&rdquo; he asked suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly glanced at his left hand. &ldquo;Old m-m-marks from the teeth of some
      of the rats.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Excuse me; I was speaking of the other hand. That is a fresh hurt.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The slender, flexible right hand was badly cut and grazed. The Gadfly held
      it up. The wrist was swollen, and across it ran a deep and long black
      bruise.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is a m-m-mere trifle, as you see,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;When I was arrested the
      other day,&mdash;thanks to Your Eminence,&rdquo;&mdash;he made another little
      bow,&mdash;&ldquo;one of the soldiers stamped on it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli took the wrist and examined it closely. &ldquo;How does it come to be
      in such a state now, after three weeks?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;It is all inflamed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Possibly the p-p-pressure of the iron has not done it much good.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Cardinal looked up with a frown.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have they been putting irons on a fresh wound?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;N-n-naturally, Your Eminence; that is what fresh wounds are for. Old
      wounds are not much use. They will only ache; you c-c-can&rsquo;t make them burn
      properly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli looked at him again in the same close, scrutinizing way; then
      rose and opened a drawer full of surgical appliances.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Give me the hand,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly, with a face as hard as beaten iron, held out the hand, and
      Montanelli, after bathing the injured place, gently bandaged it. Evidently
      he was accustomed to such work.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will speak about the irons,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And now I want to ask you
      another question: What do you propose to do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Th-th-that is very simply answered, Your Eminence. To escape if I can,
      and if I can&rsquo;t, to die.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why &lsquo;to die&rsquo;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because if the Governor doesn&rsquo;t succeed in getting me shot, I shall be
      sent to the galleys, and for me that c-c-comes to the same thing. I have
      not got the health to live through it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli rested his arm on the table and pondered silently. The Gadfly
      did not disturb him. He was leaning back with half-shut eyes, lazily
      enjoying the delicious physical sensation of relief from the chains.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Supposing,&rdquo; Montanelli began again, &ldquo;that you were to succeed in
      escaping; what should you do with your life?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have already told Your Eminence; I should k-k-kill rats.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You would kill rats. That is to say, that if I were to let you escape
      from here now,&mdash;supposing I had the power to do so,&mdash;you would
      use your freedom to foster violence and bloodshed instead of preventing
      them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly raised his eyes to the crucifix on the wall. &ldquo;&lsquo;Not peace, but a
      sword&rsquo;;&mdash;at l-least I should be in good company. For my own part,
      though, I prefer pistols.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signor Rivarez,&rdquo; said the Cardinal with unruffled composure, &ldquo;I have not
      insulted you as yet, or spoken slightingly of your beliefs or friends. May
      I not expect the same courtesy from you, or do you wish me to suppose that
      an atheist cannot be a gentleman?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, I q-quite forgot. Your Eminence places courtesy high among the
      Christian virtues. I remember your sermon in Florence, on the occasion of
      my c-controversy with your anonymous defender.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is one of the subjects about which I wished to speak to you. Would
      you mind explaining to me the reason of the peculiar bitterness you seem
      to feel against me? If you have simply picked me out as a convenient
      target, that is another matter. Your methods of political controversy are
      your own affair, and we are not discussing politics now. But I fancied at
      the time that there was some personal animosity towards me; and if so, I
      should be glad to know whether I have ever done you wrong or in any way
      given you cause for such a feeling.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Ever done him wrong! The Gadfly put up the bandaged hand to his throat. &ldquo;I
      must refer Your Eminence to Shakspere,&rdquo; he said with a little laugh. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s
      as with the man who can&rsquo;t endure a harmless, necessary cat. My antipathy
      is a priest. The sight of the cassock makes my t-t-teeth ache.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, if it is only that&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; Montanelli dismissed the subject
      with an indifferent gesture.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Still,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;abuse is one thing and perversion of fact is another.
      When you stated, in answer to my sermon, that I knew the identity of the
      anonymous writer, you made a mistake,&mdash;I do not accuse you of wilful
      falsehood,&mdash;and stated what was untrue. I am to this day quite
      ignorant of his name.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly put his head on one side, like an intelligent robin, looked at
      him for a moment gravely, then suddenly threw himself back and burst into
      a peal of laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;S-s-sancta simplicitas! Oh, you, sweet, innocent, Arcadian people&mdash;and
      you never guessed! You n-never saw the cloven hoof?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli stood up. &ldquo;Am I to understand, Signor Rivarez, that you wrote
      both sides of the controversy yourself?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was a shame, I know,&rdquo; the Gadfly answered, looking up with wide,
      innocent blue eyes. &ldquo;And you s-s-swallowed everything whole; just as if it
      had been an oyster. It was very wrong; but oh, it w-w-was so funny!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli bit his lip and sat down again. He had realized from the first
      that the Gadfly was trying to make him lose his temper, and had resolved
      to keep it whatever happened; but he was beginning to find excuses for the
      Governor&rsquo;s exasperation. A man who had been spending two hours a day for
      the last three weeks in interrogating the Gadfly might be pardoned an
      occasional swear-word.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We will drop that subject,&rdquo; he said quietly. &ldquo;What I wanted to see you
      for particularly is this: My position here as Cardinal gives me some
      voice, if I choose to claim my privilege, in the question of what is to be
      done with you. The only use to which I should ever put such a privilege
      would be to interfere in case of any violence to you which was not
      necessary to prevent you from doing violence to others. I sent for you,
      therefore, partly in order to ask whether you have anything to complain
      of,&mdash;I will see about the irons; but perhaps there is something else,&mdash;and
      partly because I felt it right, before giving my opinion, to see for
      myself what sort of man you are.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have nothing to complain of, Your Eminence. &lsquo;A la guerre comme a la
      guerre.&rsquo; I am not a schoolboy, to expect any government to pat me on the
      head for s-s-smuggling firearms onto its territory. It&rsquo;s only natural that
      they should hit as hard as they can. As for what sort of man I am, you
      have had a romantic confession of my sins once. Is not that enough; or
      w-w-would you like me to begin again?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand you,&rdquo; Montanelli said coldly, taking up a pencil and
      twisting it between his fingers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely Your Eminence has not forgotten old Diego, the pilgrim?&rdquo; He
      suddenly changed his voice and began to speak as Diego: &ldquo;I am a miserable
      sinner&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The pencil snapped in Montanelli&rsquo;s hand. &ldquo;That is too much!&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly leaned his head back with a soft little laugh, and sat watching
      while the Cardinal paced silently up and down the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signor Rivarez,&rdquo; said Montanelli, stopping at last in front of him, &ldquo;you
      have done a thing to me that a man who was born of a woman should hesitate
      to do to his worst enemy. You have stolen in upon my private grief and
      have made for yourself a mock and a jest out of the sorrow of a
      fellow-man. I once more beg you to tell me: Have I ever done you wrong?
      And if not, why have you played this heartless trick on me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Gadfly, leaning back against the chair-cushions, looked up with his
      subtle, chilling, inscrutable smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It am-m-mused me, Your Eminence; you took it all so much to heart, and it
      rem-m-minded me&mdash;a little bit&mdash;of a variety show&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Montanelli, white to the very lips, turned away and rang the bell.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can take back the prisoner,&rdquo; he said when the guards came in.
    </p>
    <p>
      After they had gone he sat down at the table, still trembling with
      unaccustomed indignation, and took up a pile of reports which had been
      sent in to him by the parish priests of his diocese.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently he pushed them away, and, leaning on the table, hid his face in
      both hands. The Gadfly seemed to have left some terrible shadow of
      himself, some ghostly trail of his personality, to haunt the room; and
      Montanelli sat trembling and cowering, not daring to look up lest he
      should see the phantom presence that he knew was not there. The spectre
      hardly amounted to a hallucination. It was a mere fancy of overwrought
      nerves; but he was seized with an unutterable dread of its shadowy
      presence&mdash;of the wounded hand, the smiling, cruel mouth, the
      mysterious eyes, like deep sea water&mdash;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      He shook off the fancy and settled to his work. All day long he had
      scarcely a free moment, and the thing did not trouble him; but going into
      his bedroom late at night, he stopped on the threshold with a sudden shock
      of fear. What if he should see it in a dream? He recovered himself
      immediately and knelt down before the crucifix to pray.
    </p>
    <p>
      But he lay awake the whole night through.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0022" id="link2HCH0022">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
