<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
   <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
      V
    </h2>
    <p>
      THAT afternoon Arthur felt the need of a long walk. He intrusted his
      luggage to a fellow-student and went to Leghorn on foot.
    </p>
    <p>
      The day was damp and cloudy, but not cold; and the low, level country
      seemed to him fairer than he had ever known it to look before. He had a
      sense of delight in the soft elasticity of the wet grass under his feet
      and in the shy, wondering eyes of the wild spring flowers by the roadside.
      In a thorn-acacia bush at the edge of a little strip of wood a bird was
      building a nest, and flew up as he passed with a startled cry and a quick
      fluttering of brown wings.
    </p>
    <p>
      He tried to keep his mind fixed upon the devout meditations proper to the
      eve of Good Friday. But thoughts of Montanelli and Gemma got so much in
      the way of this devotional exercise that at last he gave up the attempt
      and allowed his fancy to drift away to the wonders and glories of the
      coming insurrection, and to the part in it that he had allotted to his two
      idols. The Padre was to be the leader, the apostle, the prophet before
      whose sacred wrath the powers of darkness were to flee, and at whose feet
      the young defenders of Liberty were to learn afresh the old doctrines, the
      old truths in their new and unimagined significance.
    </p>
    <p>
      And Gemma? Oh, Gemma would fight at the barricades. She was made of the
      clay from which heroines are moulded; she would be the perfect comrade,
      the maiden undefiled and unafraid, of whom so many poets have dreamed. She
      would stand beside him, shoulder to shoulder, rejoicing under the winged
      death-storm; and they would die together, perhaps in the moment of victory&mdash;without
      doubt there would be a victory. Of his love he would tell her nothing; he
      would say no word that might disturb her peace or spoil her tranquil sense
      of comradeship. She was to him a holy thing, a spotless victim to be laid
      upon the altar as a burnt-offering for the deliverance of the people; and
      who was he that he should enter into the white sanctuary of a soul that
      knew no other love than God and Italy?
    </p>
    <p>
      God and Italy&mdash;&mdash;Then came a sudden drop from the clouds as he
      entered the great, dreary house in the &ldquo;Street of Palaces,&rdquo; and Julia&rsquo;s
      butler, immaculate, calm, and politely disapproving as ever, confronted
      him upon the stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-evening, Gibbons; are my brothers in?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Thomas is in, sir; and Mrs. Burton. They are in the drawing room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur went in with a dull sense of oppression. What a dismal house it
      was! The flood of life seemed to roll past and leave it always just above
      high-water mark. Nothing in it ever changed&mdash;neither the people, nor
      the family portraits, nor the heavy furniture and ugly plate, nor the
      vulgar ostentation of riches, nor the lifeless aspect of everything. Even
      the flowers on the brass stands looked like painted metal flowers that had
      never known the stirring of young sap within them in the warm spring days.
      Julia, dressed for dinner, and waiting for visitors in the drawing room
      which was to her the centre of existence, might have sat for a
      fashion-plate just as she was, with her wooden smile and flaxen ringlets,
      and the lap-dog on her knee.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do, Arthur?&rdquo; she said stiffly, giving him the tips of her
      fingers for a moment, and then transferring them to the more congenial
      contact of the lap-dog&rsquo;s silken coat. &ldquo;I hope you are quite well and have
      made satisfactory progress at college.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur murmured the first commonplace that he could think of at the
      moment, and relapsed into uncomfortable silence. The arrival of James, in
      his most pompous mood and accompanied by a stiff, elderly shipping-agent,
      did not improve matters; and when Gibbons announced that dinner was
      served, Arthur rose with a little sigh of relief.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t come to dinner, Julia. If you&rsquo;ll excuse me I will go to my room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re overdoing that fasting, my boy,&rdquo; said Thomas; &ldquo;I am sure you&rsquo;ll
      make yourself ill.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no! Good-night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In the corridor Arthur met the under housemaid and asked her to knock at
      his door at six in the morning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The signorino is going to church?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. Good-night, Teresa.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went into his room. It had belonged to his mother, and the alcove
      opposite the window had been fitted up during her long illness as an
      oratory. A great crucifix on a black pedestal occupied the middle of the
      altar; and before it hung a little Roman lamp. This was the room where she
      had died. Her portrait was on the wall beside the bed; and on the table
      stood a china bowl which had been hers, filled with a great bunch of her
      favourite violets. It was just a year since her death; and the Italian
      servants had not forgotten her.
    </p>
    <p>
      He took out of his portmanteau a framed picture, carefully wrapped up. It
      was a crayon portrait of Montanelli, which had come from Rome only a few
      days before. He was unwrapping this precious treasure when Julia&rsquo;s page
      brought in a supper-tray on which the old Italian cook, who had served
      Gladys before the harsh, new mistress came, had placed such little
      delicacies as she considered her dear signorino might permit himself to
      eat without infringing the rules of the Church. Arthur refused everything
      but a piece of bread; and the page, a nephew of Gibbons, lately arrived
      from England, grinned significantly as he carried out the tray. He had
      already joined the Protestant camp in the servants&rsquo; hall.
    </p>
    <p>
      Arthur went into the alcove and knelt down before the crucifix, trying to
      compose his mind to the proper attitude for prayer and meditation. But
      this he found difficult to accomplish. He had, as Thomas said, rather
      overdone the Lenten privations, and they had gone to his head like strong
      wine. Little quivers of excitement went down his back, and the crucifix
      swam in a misty cloud before his eyes. It was only after a long litany,
      mechanically repeated, that he succeeded in recalling his wandering
      imagination to the mystery of the Atonement. At last sheer physical
      weariness conquered the feverish agitation of his nerves, and he lay down
      to sleep in a calm and peaceful mood, free from all unquiet or disturbing
      thoughts.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was fast asleep when a sharp, impatient knock came at his door. &ldquo;Ah,
      Teresa!&rdquo; he thought, turning over lazily. The knock was repeated, and he
      awoke with a violent start.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorino! signorino!&rdquo; cried a man&rsquo;s voice in Italian; &ldquo;get up for the
      love of God!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur jumped out of bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is the matter? Who is it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s I, Gian Battista. Get up, quick, for Our Lady&rsquo;s sake!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur hurriedly dressed and opened the door. As he stared in perplexity
      at the coachman&rsquo;s pale, terrified face, the sound of tramping feet and
      clanking metal came along the corridor, and he suddenly realized the
      truth.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For me?&rdquo; he asked coolly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For you! Oh, signorino, make haste! What have you to hide? See, I can put&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have nothing to hide. Do my brothers know?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The first uniform appeared at the turn of the passage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The signor has been called; all the house is awake. Alas! what a
      misfortune&mdash;what a terrible misfortune! And on Good Friday! Holy
      Saints, have pity!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gian Battista burst into tears. Arthur moved a few steps forward and
      waited for the gendarmes, who came clattering along, followed by a
      shivering crowd of servants in various impromptu costumes. As the soldiers
      surrounded Arthur, the master and mistress of the house brought up the
      rear of this strange procession; he in dressing gown and slippers, she in
      a long peignoir, with her hair in curlpapers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is, sure, another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the
      ark! Here comes a pair of very strange beasts!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The quotation flashed across Arthur&rsquo;s mind as he looked at the grotesque
      figures. He checked a laugh with a sense of its jarring incongruity&mdash;this
      was a time for worthier thoughts. &ldquo;Ave Maria, Regina Coeli!&rdquo; he whispered,
      and turned his eyes away, that the bobbing of Julia&rsquo;s curlpapers might not
      again tempt him to levity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Kindly explain to me,&rdquo; said Mr. Burton, approaching the officer of
      gendarmerie, &ldquo;what is the meaning of this violent intrusion into a private
      house? I warn you that, unless you are prepared to furnish me with a
      satisfactory explanation, I shall feel bound to complain to the English
      Ambassador.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I presume,&rdquo; replied the officer stiffly, &ldquo;that you will recognize this as
      a sufficient explanation; the English Ambassador certainly will.&rdquo; He
      pulled out a warrant for the arrest of Arthur Burton, student of
      philosophy, and, handing it to James, added coldly: &ldquo;If you wish for any
      further explanation, you had better apply in person to the chief of
      police.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Julia snatched the paper from her husband, glanced over it, and flew at
      Arthur like nothing else in the world but a fashionable lady in a rage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So it&rsquo;s you that have disgraced the family!&rdquo; she screamed; &ldquo;setting all
      the rabble in the town gaping and staring as if the thing were a show? So
      you have turned jail-bird, now, with all your piety! It&rsquo;s what we might
      have expected from that Popish woman&rsquo;s child&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must not speak to a prisoner in a foreign language, madam,&rdquo; the
      officer interrupted; but his remonstrance was hardly audible under the
      torrent of Julia&rsquo;s vociferous English.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just what we might have expected! Fasting and prayer and saintly
      meditation; and this is what was underneath it all! I thought that would
      be the end of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Dr. Warren had once compared Julia to a salad into which the cook had
      upset the vinegar cruet. The sound of her thin, hard voice set Arthur&rsquo;s
      teeth on edge, and the simile suddenly popped up in his memory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no use in this kind of talk,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You need not be afraid of
      any unpleasantness; everyone will understand that you are all quite
      innocent. I suppose, gentlemen, you want to search my things. I have
      nothing to hide.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      While the gendarmes ransacked the room, reading his letters, examining his
      college papers, and turning out drawers and boxes, he sat waiting on the
      edge of the bed, a little flushed with excitement, but in no way
      distressed. The search did not disquiet him. He had always burned letters
      which could possibly compromise anyone, and beyond a few manuscript
      verses, half revolutionary, half mystical, and two or three numbers of
      Young Italy, the gendarmes found nothing to repay them for their trouble.
      Julia, after a long resistance, yielded to the entreaties of her
      brother-in-law and went back to bed, sweeping past Arthur with magnificent
      disdain, James meekly following.
    </p>
    <p>
      When they had left the room, Thomas, who all this while had been tramping
      up and down, trying to look indifferent, approached the officer and asked
      permission to speak to the prisoner. Receiving a nod in answer, he went up
      to Arthur and muttered in a rather husky voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say; this is an infernally awkward business. I&rsquo;m very sorry about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur looked up with a face as serene as a summer morning. &ldquo;You have
      always been good to me,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s nothing to be sorry about. I
      shall be safe enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look here, Arthur!&rdquo; Thomas gave his moustache a hard pull and plunged
      head first into the awkward question. &ldquo;Is&mdash;all this anything to do
      with&mdash;money? Because, if it is, I&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;With money! Why, no! What could it have to do&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then it&rsquo;s some political tomfoolery? I thought so. Well, don&rsquo;t you get
      down in the mouth&mdash;and never mind all the stuff Julia talks. It&rsquo;s
      only her spiteful tongue; and if you want help,&mdash;cash, or anything,&mdash;let
      me know, will you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Arthur held out his hand in silence, and Thomas left the room with a
      carefully made-up expression of unconcern that rendered his face more
      stolid than ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      The gendarmes, meanwhile, had finished their search, and the officer in
      charge requested Arthur to put on his outdoor clothes. He obeyed at once
      and turned to leave the room; then stopped with sudden hesitation. It
      seemed hard to take leave of his mother&rsquo;s oratory in the presence of these
      officials.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you any objection to leaving the room for a moment?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;You
      see that I cannot escape and that there is nothing to conceal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sorry, but it is forbidden to leave a prisoner alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, it doesn&rsquo;t matter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went into the alcove, and, kneeling down, kissed the feet and pedestal
      of the crucifix, whispering softly: &ldquo;Lord, keep me faithful unto death.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When he rose, the officer was standing by the table, examining
      Montanelli&rsquo;s portrait. &ldquo;Is this a relative of yours?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; it is my confessor, the new Bishop of Brisighella.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      On the staircase the Italian servants were waiting, anxious and sorrowful.
      They all loved Arthur for his own sake and his mother&rsquo;s, and crowded round
      him, kissing his hands and dress with passionate grief. Gian Battista
      stood by, the tears dripping down his gray moustache. None of the Burtons
      came out to take leave of him. Their coldness accentuated the tenderness
      and sympathy of the servants, and Arthur was near to breaking down as he
      pressed the hands held out to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-bye, Gian Battista. Kiss the little ones for me. Good-bye, Teresa.
      Pray for me, all of you; and God keep you! Good-bye, good-bye!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He ran hastily downstairs to the front door. A moment later only a little
      group of silent men and sobbing women stood on the doorstep watching the
      carriage as it drove away.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0006" id="link2HCH0006">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
