<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
  <head>
    <title>Epilogue</title>
    <link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
    <section id="epilogue" epub:type="epilogue">
      <h2 epub:type="title">Epilogue</h2>

    <p>
      &ldquo;GEMMA, there&rsquo;s a man downstairs who wants to see you.&rdquo; Martini spoke in
      the subdued tone which they had both unconsciously adopted during these
      last ten days. That, and a certain slow evenness of speech and movement,
      were the sole expression which either of them gave to their grief.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gemma, with bare arms and an apron over her dress, was standing at a
      table, putting up little packages of cartridges for distribution. She had
      stood over the work since early morning; and now, in the glaring
      afternoon, her face looked haggard with fatigue.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A man, Cesare? What does he want?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know, dear. He wouldn&rsquo;t tell me. He said he must speak to you
      alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well.&rdquo; She took off her apron and pulled down the sleeves of her
      dress. &ldquo;I must go to him, I suppose; but very likely it&rsquo;s only a spy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In any case, I shall be in the next room, within call. As soon as you get
      rid of him you had better go and lie down a bit. You have been standing
      too long to-day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no! I would rather go on working.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She went slowly down the stairs, Martini following in silence. She had
      grown to look ten years older in these few days, and the gray streak
      across her hair had widened into a broad band. She mostly kept her eyes
      lowered now; but when, by chance, she raised them, he shivered at the
      horror in their shadows.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the little parlour she found a clumsy-looking man standing with his
      heels together in the middle of the floor. His whole figure and the
      half-frightened way he looked up when she came in, suggested to her that
      he must be one of the Swiss guards. He wore a countryman&rsquo;s blouse, which
      evidently did not belong to him, and kept glancing round as though afraid
      of detection.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Can you speak German?&rdquo; he asked in the heavy Zurich patois.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A little. I hear you want to see me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are Signora Bolla? I&rsquo;ve brought you a letter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A&mdash;letter?&rdquo; She was beginning to tremble, and rested one hand on the
      table to steady herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m one of the guard over there.&rdquo; He pointed out of the window to the
      fortress on the hill. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s from&mdash;the man that was shot last week. He
      wrote it the night before. I promised him I&rsquo;d give it into your own hand
      myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She bent her head down. So he had written after all.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s why I&rsquo;ve been so long bringing it,&rdquo; the soldier went on. &ldquo;He said
      I was not to give it to anyone but you, and I couldn&rsquo;t get off before&mdash;they
      watched me so. I had to borrow these things to come in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was fumbling in the breast of his blouse. The weather was hot, and the
      sheet of folded paper that he pulled out was not only dirty and crumpled,
      but damp. He stood for a moment shuffling his feet uneasily; then put up
      one hand and scratched the back of his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You won&rsquo;t say anything,&rdquo; he began again timidly, with a distrustful
      glance at her. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s as much as my life&rsquo;s worth to have come here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I shall not say anything. No, wait a minute&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As he turned to go, she stopped him, feeling for her purse; but he drew
      back, offended.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want your money,&rdquo; he said roughly. &ldquo;I did it for him&mdash;because
      he asked me to. I&rsquo;d have done more than that for him. He&rsquo;d been good to me&mdash;God
      help me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little catch in his voice made her look up. He was slowly rubbing a
      grimy sleeve across his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We had to shoot,&rdquo; he went on under his breath; &ldquo;my mates and I. A man
      must obey orders. We bungled it, and had to fire again&mdash;and he
      laughed at us&mdash;he called us the awkward squad&mdash;and he&rsquo;d been
      good to me&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was silence in the room. A moment later he straightened himself up,
      made a clumsy military salute, and went away.
    </p>
    <p>
      She stood still for a little while with the paper in her hand; then sat
      down by the open window to read. The letter was closely written in pencil,
      and in some parts hardly legible. But the first two words stood out quite
      clear upon the page; and they were in English:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear Jim.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The writing grew suddenly blurred and misty. And she had lost him again&mdash;had
      lost him again! At the sight of the familiar childish nickname all the
      hopelessness of her bereavement came over her afresh, and she put out her
      hands in blind desperation, as though the weight of the earth-clods that
      lay above him were pressing on her heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently she took up the paper again and went on reading:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am to be shot at sunrise to-morrow. So if I am to keep at all my
      promise to tell you everything, I must keep it now. But, after all, there
      is not much need of explanations between you and me. We always understood
      each other without many words, even when we were little things.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And so, you see, my dear, you had no need to break your heart over that
      old story of the blow. It was a hard hit, of course; but I have had plenty
      of others as hard, and yet I have managed to get over them,&mdash;even to
      pay back a few of them,&mdash;and here I am still, like the mackerel in
      our nursery-book (I forget its name), &lsquo;Alive and kicking, oh!&rsquo; This is my
      last kick, though; and then, to-morrow morning, and&mdash;&lsquo;Finita la
      Commedia!&rsquo; You and I will translate that: &lsquo;The variety show is over&rsquo;; and
      will give thanks to the gods that they have had, at least, so much mercy
      on us. It is not much, but it is something; and for this and all other
      blessings may we be truly thankful!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About that same to-morrow morning, I want both you and Martini to
      understand clearly that I am quite happy and satisfied, and could ask no
      better thing of Fate. Tell that to Martini as a message from me; he is a
      good fellow and a good comrade, and he will understand. You see, dear, I
      know that the stick-in-the-mud people are doing us a good turn and
      themselves a bad one by going back to secret trials and executions so
      soon, and I know that if you who are left stand together steadily and hit
      hard, you will see great things. As for me, I shall go out into the
      courtyard with as light a heart as any child starting home for the
      holidays. I have done my share of the work, and this death-sentence is the
      proof that I have done it thoroughly. They kill me because they are afraid
      of me; and what more can any man&rsquo;s heart desire?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It desires just one thing more, though. A man who is going to die has a
      right to a personal fancy, and mine is that you should see why I have
      always been such a sulky brute to you, and so slow to forget old scores.
      Of course, though, you understand why, and I tell you only for the
      pleasure of writing the words. I loved you, Gemma, when you were an ugly
      little girl in a gingham frock, with a scratchy tucker and your hair in a
      pig-tail down your back; and I love you still. Do you remember that day
      when I kissed your hand, and when you so piteously begged me &lsquo;never to do
      that again&rsquo;? It was a scoundrelly trick to play, I know; but you must
      forgive that; and now I kiss the paper where I have written your name. So
      I have kissed you twice, and both times without your consent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is all. Good-bye, my dear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no signature, but a verse which they had learned together as
      children was written under the letter:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
                &ldquo;Then am I
                 A happy fly,
                 If I live
                 Or if I die.&rdquo;

</pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Half an hour later Martini entered the room, and, startled out of the
      silence of half a life-time, threw down the placard he was carrying and
      flung his arms about her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gemma! What is it, for God&rsquo;s sake? Don&rsquo;t sob like that&mdash;you that
      never cry! Gemma! Gemma, my darling!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing, Cesare; I will tell you afterwards&mdash;I&mdash;can&rsquo;t talk
      about it just now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She hurriedly slipped the tear-stained letter into her pocket; and,
      rising, leaned out of the window to hide her face. Martini held his tongue
      and bit his moustache. After all these years he had betrayed himself like
      a schoolboy&mdash;and she had not even noticed it!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Cathedral bell is tolling,&rdquo; she said after a little while, looking
      round with recovered self-command. &ldquo;Someone must be dead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is what I came to show you,&rdquo; Martini answered in his everyday voice.
      He picked up the placard from the floor and handed it to her. Hastily
      printed in large type was a black-bordered announcement that: &ldquo;Our dearly
      beloved Bishop, His Eminence the Cardinal, Monsignor Lorenzo Montanelli,&rdquo;
       had died suddenly at Ravenna, &ldquo;from the rupture of an aneurism of the
      heart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She glanced up quickly from the paper, and Martini answered the unspoken
      suggestion in her eyes with a shrug of his shoulders.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What would you have, Madonna? Aneurism is as good a word as any other.&rdquo;
     </p>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
